line of rail conspicuously running through the whole, and you may trace
that clearly, though you cannot always trace the branches.  Now in this
outline there are three great series of prophetic periods—the seven
seals, the seven trumpets, and the seven vials; and these three series
appear in a remarkable manner to follow each other.  First there are the
seals, as in chap. vi.; and when the sixth seal is opened, and the
seventh about to follow, there appears a general expectation of the
coming of the Lord.  But when the seventh seal is actually opened,
instead of our coming to the end, as apparently was expected, we find a
second series developed.  The seven trumpets were wrapped as it were in
the seventh seal (viii. 1, 2), so that when it was opened they appeared,
and a fresh series commenced, and the trumpet-angels one after another
blew their blast.  At length the seventh trumpet is sounded, and again it
appears as though you had reached the end.  But like the seventh seal,
it, too, is found to contain within itself a third series.  The seven
vials are wrapped within it, and when that last trumpet is blown they are
poured forth in awful succession on a wicked world.  Thus the seventh
seal contains all the trumpets, and the seventh trumpet all the vials.
Now if this be the case it is clear that the sixth vial must come very
near the end.  The trumpets are none sounded till the six seals are
passed and the seventh seal is opened.  The vials do not begin till the
six trumpets have completed their blast and the seventh has sounded; and
of the vials five must have been poured out already, so that there can be
nothing remaining but the seventh, or the last.

To take the very homely illustration of a railway.  Suppose a series of
stations on a line, the seventh being a junction; suppose that on the
branch from that junction there was another series of stations, the
seventh again being a junction; and from that second junction there was
another line of seven stations, the last being your home.  What would you
think of your position when you had travelled the whole length of the
main line, and the whole of the first branch, and when you had gone so
far along the second branch that you had actually reached the sixth
station on that last line?  You would say, surely, that you were near the
end of your journey, close to home.  Now whenever the Church of God
reaches the sixth vial that will be its position.  All the seals will
have been opened, all the trumpets blown, and six of the seven vials
poured out.

But that I believe to be our position now, and that we are at this
present time living under the sixth vial.  I believe that the great
public, political event of the sixth vial, is the drying up of the
Ottoman Empire, and that we can all see to be in progress.  There can be
no doubt about the great, public, political fact.  It is confirmed by
every newspaper, and is forced on the attention of England by the sore
distress brought on many families through the Turkish bankruptcy.  But if
this be the fact predicted by the symbol of the drying up of the
Euphrates, then it follows that we are living under the sixth vial, and
that the seventh vial is all that remains of the great prophetic series.

(2.)  But consider next the contents of the seventh vial.  The seventh
seal contained the series of seven trumpets, and the seventh trumpet the
series of seven vials.  May there not be some similar series wrapped up
in the seventh vial?

Such a question would be perfectly reasonable, but the only answer that
we can give is that we do not find any such series described in the
prophecy.  On the other hand, everything in it looks like the end.  When
the seventh angel poured out his vial there came a great voice out of the
temple of heaven from the throne, saying, ‘It is done!’  It certainly did
not look like the commencement of another series, but taught us rather to
look out for the great winding up of the whole and the final close of the
great prophetic plan.  So in the account of the seventh vial you may see
four things plainly revealed;—the fall of Babylon, which I believe to be
the fall of Rome, chap. xvi. 17, to the end of xviii.; the marriage
supper of the Lamb, chap, xix. 1–9; the triumphant victory of the Son of
God, chap. xix. 11, 12; and, last of all, the millennial reign, chap. xx.
Surely, then, this vial brings us to the end.  Surely when it is poured
forth we shall have done with the politics of the world, and shall cease
to look for the gradual development of history.  All thoughts will then
be occupied by the unspeakable blessedness of the marriage supper of the
Lamb.

It seems clear, then, that the seventh vial is the close of the series,
and that under it we are to expect the final victory of the Lord Jesus
Christ.  The conclusion, therefore, is plain, that if the exhaustion of
the Ottoman Empire is the event symbolized by the drying up of the
Euphrates, it is high time that we awake out of sleep: for the sixth vial
is already begun, and we must soon expect to behold Christ Himself, with
all the joys of His kingdom and all the terrors of a crushing victory.  I
say ‘soon,’ not ‘immediately,’ for it does not appear that this passage
teaches us to expect it any day or hour, for it describes certain great
political events which have not yet taken place.  The Euphrates is
drying, but not yet dry.  The kings have not yet passed over from the
East, and the battle of Almighty God, whatever it may symbolize, has not
yet been fought.  All, therefore, that we can say is, that we appear to
have reached what Daniel terms ‘the time of the end;’ that now it is high
time to awake out of sleep, for we already begin to see the first streaks
of morning dawn.  We have already witnessed some of the great events that
must very shortly precede the Advent, and we may begin to look out full
of hope for the actual return of the Lord Himself.

(3.)  This conclusion is confirmed by the words of our Lord Himself.  I
need not stop to prove that He is the speaker in this passage, but we
must carefully observe His words.  What does He say when the sixth vial
is poured out, and the Euphrates is drying up, and when the three evil
spirits are gone forth through Christendom?  What is the warning voice
which He Himself then gives out with reference to His coming?  What
lesson would He have us learn from these great events?  Of what are they
His signal?  Does He not teach us to be looking out for His coming?  Does
He not say, ‘Behold, I come as a thief?’  Does He not call us to a double
watchfulness, and teach us not merely to watch against the seductive
influence of these foul spirits, but to watch also for His own appearing,
and for the bright hope of joyfully meeting Him?  But if this be the
case, and if the prophecy of the sixth vial is really being now
fulfilled, as we believe it to be, by the drying up of the Turkish power;
then every fresh symptom of decay in that power, every loss of territory
by the Turks, every fresh insurrection, and every proof that the empire
is reduced to hopeless bankruptcy, is like a clarion blast of the trumpet
of God ringing through the ears of Christendom; and proclaiming, with a
distinctness which cannot be mistaken, ‘Watch, therefore, for ye know
neither the day nor the hour when the Son of Man cometh!’

II.  But if this be the case, it behoves us carefully to examine our
second question.  If such a warning is so clearly given, how can He be
said to come as a thief?  He Himself teaches us perfectly clearly that
the meaning of the illustration is that, as the thief comes without
giving notice, so He will return without previously giving any such
notice of His approach as will arouse the sleepers.  The thief does not
tell you when he is coming; and when he comes, he neither knocks the door
nor rings the bell.  But he comes quietly.  He does nothing to disturb
those that are asleep, and His object is to enter unobserved.  So our
Lord teaches us, that when He comes He will do nothing to startle the
world.  There will be nothing to prevent men eating and drinking,
marrying and giving in marriage, right up to the very end.  The men of
the world will find Him in the house before they have the least idea of
His approach.  That this is the meaning of the words is perfectly clear
from what He said (Matt. xxiv. 42–44): ‘Watch, therefore; for ye know not
what hour your Lord doth come.  But know this, that if the goodman of the
house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have
watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up.
Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son
of Man cometh.’

But, you may say, how far is this consistent with what has been said of
the probability of His return following quickly on the exhaustion of the
Ottoman Empire?  If there be a prophetic series in the book of
Revelation, and we have already reached the last station on the last
branch of the line, how is it that He can be said to come upon us without
notice as a thief does?  Has He not given us notice in this prophecy?

In answer to that question we must observe the clearly marked distinction
between His own believing people and the unbelieving world.  To His own
people He will not come as a thief, for we read in 1 Thess. v. 4, 5, ‘But
ye, brethren, are not in darkness that that day should overtake _you_ as
a thief.’  _You_ are in the light, _i.e._, for you can see Him coming; so
_you_ will not be found asleep.  So He Himself taught us distinctly in
the very passage in which He uses the illustration; for He there shows
that His own disciples are to expect His coming when they see the
predicted signs, just as they expect the summer when they see the budding
of the trees in spring (Matt. xxiv. 32, 33).  Nor are they to wait in
their expectation till they see these signs fully developed; not to wait,
_i.e._, till the young branch is fully grown; but they are to watch
beginnings, and learn from them.  They are to draw their conclusion when
the branch is yet tender, without waiting till it is fully ripened; as He
Himself taught us in Luke, xxi. 28: ‘When these things _begin_ to come to
pass, then look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draweth
nigh.’  If, therefore, you be amongst the people of God, you need never
be taken by surprise.  We do not know the exact time, but we may study
the predicted signs, and, having them before us, may look out for the
second advent just as Simeon and Anna looked out for the first.  We may
be like the servant of Elijah, going up again and again to the hill-top
to watch for the coming rain; or like the loving servant watching for the
footsteps of the master whom he loves, and perfectly ready, whenever he
returns, to open the door, and welcome him to his home.  The Lord came
suddenly to His temple, but He did not come suddenly to Simeon; and the
Lord will come as a thief to the world, but if you hold fast to His own
word He will never be as a thief to you.

I have already said, it is the _world_ that will be found asleep, and to
whom He will really come as a thief.  But some man may say, ‘If there be
these signs beforehand, will they not arouse the world as well as
believers?  Will they not awaken society?  Will they not compel men to
prepare?’  I answer that by another question, Do they?  There are certain
signs already given; do they wake up society?  Have they produced such an
impression as to arouse the great mass of worldly men?  There are the
Jews preserved as a separate people, in fulfilment of a prophecy given
more than three thousand years ago; what effect has such a fulfilment of
God’s word had in the City?  There are all the politicians of Europe at
their wits’ end because of the decay of Turkey; how many even of
yourselves have been led thereby to look out for the near approach of our
blessed Saviour?  There is Rome stripped of its temporal power in
fulfilment of great prophecies given, some of them, more than two
thousand years ago; how many are there that have been led by that
fulfilment to look out even for the fall of Babylon?  The simple fact is,
that these great fulfilments, though conspicuous to the eye of those who
study them, completely fail to produce the least impression on the deep
sleep of the unconverted world.  The prophecies are not read; the facts
are not compared with them; the lessons are not learned; and the soul is
not aroused to preparation.  How many are there even in this very town on
whom the fulfilment of God’s prophetic word has never produced the
slightest effect?  They are living just as they would have lived, or
rather sleeping as they would have slept, if there had been no prophecy
to give the warning, and no history to confirm its truth.  Can you
wonder, then, that the Lord Jesus should come upon such persons as a
thief?

But I trust, dear brethren, that He may not come as a thief to you, but
that you may be found in the light and awake, not in darkness and asleep;
or, to use the illustration of this text, that you may not wake up naked
to your everlasting shame.  I am sure you desire when He comes to be
found awake, looking out, ready to welcome Him.  You wish to be found
clothed.  Oh, think what it would be to be found naked, when all the
saints of God are standing around you in their resurrection robe!  We
have lately read of poor people startled in the night by shipwreck, and
rushing as they were to the deck, utterly unprotected against the bitter
blast of the winter’s snow-storm.  Think what it would be to be suddenly
aroused from your own deep sleep, to see all that you have in the world
wrecked around you, and to find your poor soul quite naked, while the
terrible storm of God’s most just judgment beats upon you, and breaks
down every hope of escape!  Oh, dear brethren, may it never be so with
you!  May you be amongst those who can peacefully look for His appearing,
because you are clothed in His righteousness!  May you be kept walking in
the light, and cleansed from all sin through His most precious blood!
Then you will have nothing to fear, but everything to hope for, in the
thought of His coming.  Then He will never come as a thief to you, for
you will be ready at any time to open the door and welcome Him.  As the
bride delights in the bridegroom, so will you delight in Him.  Your trial
will consist, not in the dread of His coming, but in the difficulty of
patiently waiting for His return, and when He comes you will find no
language to bless and praise His holy name, for His boundless and
unmerited love in having redeemed you by His atoning blood; in having
called you by His sovereign grace; in having forgiven you through His
finished atonement; in having sanctified you by the Holy Ghost; and in
having preserved you in His own unchanging faithfulness, till He shall
have finally presented you spotless and faultless before the throne of
His everlasting glory.




JERUSALEM.


There is no city in the whole world which fills so important a place in
the Word of God as Jerusalem.  There are several others which are more
prominent in the world’s politics, but in the great economy of God, as
revealed in Sacred Scripture, Jerusalem stands out pre-eminent above them
all.  We Englishmen think of London, with its vast population and
enormous wealth, as the leading city of the world; but except in so far
as it is the capital of one of the isles of the sea, it has no place in
prophecy.  The French look upon Paris as the most beautiful city of
Europe, and the centre of European influence; but, unless it is the
predicted seat of the Beast, which some persons are disposed to consider
it, it is literally nowhere in the Word of God.  And Rome, which all
regard with something of awe and veneration, as being associated with the
most thrilling histories of the past, is described in the Prophetic Word
as the seven-hilled city on which is seated the mystic Babylon, the great
whore of the Apocalypse.  But the whole of Sacred Scripture abounds in
allusions to Jerusalem.  History, poetry, and prophecy are all full of
it.  It is described as ‘beautiful for situation,’ and ‘the joy of the
whole earth.’  The people of God are taught to pray for it, and the
promise is given that those who love it shall prosper.  The sacred feet
of the Son of God trod the pavement of its Temple, and we are assured
that it will never disappear from God’s great dealings with mankind,
until the New Jerusalem shall descend from heaven from our God, and there
shall be new heavens and a new earth at the coming of the Lord of glory.

It was the sight of this beautiful city, with its magnificent Temple
crowning the heights of Mount Moriah, that drew from our blessed Saviour
the remarkable prophecy contained in the 24th of St. Matthew and the 21st
of St. Luke.  The disciples had pointed out to Him the buildings of the
Temple; and afterwards, as they sat together on Mount Olives, on the
opposite side of the valley, He taught them the vanity of all earthly
strength.  He told them that of the beautiful Temple not one stone should
be left upon another.  And He also taught them that there would be a
lengthened period of desolation and humiliation; for that Jerusalem
should be ‘trodden under foot of the Gentiles until the times of the
Gentiles should be fulfilled.’  Jerusalem was to be not merely beaten
down, but kept down, until a certain predicted period should expire.  But
while the words distinctly predict a long period of desolation, they no
less clearly imply the assurance of an ultimate restoration.  They teach
that Jerusalem is not to be trodden down for ever, but only till the
times of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled; implying, as clearly as words
can, that, when those times are expired, the Holy City shall rise again
in its beauty.  The words predict a desolation for a limited period, and
at the close of that period restoration.

I have not time to discuss what is meant by ‘the times of the Gentiles.’
Suffice it to say, that I believe it to be this present Gentile
dispensation; this time of Gentile power, and Gentile opportunity; this
time during which God is gathering out his elect people from the Gentile
world, and is employing a Gentile Church in the sacred ministry of the
Gospel of His grace.  It seems to be the time of the ingathering of the
Gentile Church, for it is to last, according to St. Paul, ‘until the
fulness of the Gentiles be come in;’ and it is clearly the time of the
exercise of Gentile power, for they are Gentiles by whom Jerusalem is to
be trodden under foot.

But I do not wish to occupy time in any discussion of this period, but
rather to invite your special attention to those Gentile powers which
have trodden Jerusalem under foot.  Which are they? and how do they now
stand?

What, then, are the Gentile powers which have trodden down Jerusalem?  In
the course of the eighteen hundred years of her humiliation there have
been times during which there have been short interruptions in the sway
of the ruling powers.  But, looking at the period as one great whole, and
fixing our attention on the conspicuous outlines of history, we find that
there are two powers which stand out conspicuous above all the rest as
the great oppressors of the holy city.  These are Rome and the successive
forms of that Mahommedan power of which the present head is Turkey.  Rome
trod her down at the siege of Jerusalem, and Turkey holds her down now.
Rome cast her to the ground, and when she was down Turkey set its foot on
her neck.  Rome hurled her to the dust, and Turkey now tramples her in
the mire.  Rome destroyed God’s Temple, and actually ploughed up the
sacred ground on which it stood.  Turkey maintains on the sacred site the
mosque of Omar; and on that holy hill where Abraham offered Isaac, where
David offered the oxen of Araunah, where Solomon built his Temple, and
where the Lord Jesus, the Son of David, cast out all that was unholy;
there, by Turkish authority, now stands a Mahommedan mosque; and there no
Jew is permitted to set his foot, the only privilege allowed him being to
kneel in the Street of Wailing outside the enclosure, and there weep for
the desolation of Jerusalem.

There is something very remarkable in this fact, because these are the
two powers especially connected with the two great predicted apostasies,
Popery and Mahommedanism; Rome being the seat of the Popedom, and the
Sultan of Turkey the recognised head of the Mahommedan apostasy.

But I have no time now to examine that connexion, nor is it my present
object to do so.  The one fact I desire to leave perfectly clearly on
your mind is this, that Rome, and the Mussulman power of which Turkey is
now the head, are the two Gentile powers which for the last eighteen
hundred years must be charged with having trodden down Jerusalem.

And now, what is the present position of these two powers?  And how do
they stand in Europe?  What is the condition, and what the prospect, of
these two great oppressors of Jerusalem?

As for Rome, as a political power it has ceased to exist, for I need not
say that the modern kingdom of Italy has nothing to do with it.  It is
not built on the old lines, but is altogether a new creation, an
extension of the kingdom of Sardinia.  Now there can be no doubt whatever
that the vast, iron-footed, undivided, Roman Empire, of which Titus was
emperor at the time he trod down Jerusalem, has long since passed away.
Different historians may assign different dates to its dissolution, but
no one doubts for one moment that it is dissolved.  The power that
trampled down Jerusalem is broken up into ten kingdoms, and the Imperial
head is no more.  There is no successor to the throne of Titus, and the
throne itself is in fragments.

It is very remarkable also that the Papal head which succeeded the
Imperial has within the last few years come also to an end as a political
power.  After the division of the undivided empire the ten kingdoms were
to a great extent held together by the Papal head which succeeded the
Imperial.  The Pope claimed to be the sole authority from which the kings
derived their power, and before the Reformation all Europe acknowledged
his claim.  He was supposed to hold all the crowns of Europe in his hand.
But that is all over now.  The kings have taken away his dominion.  As a
political power the Papal head has followed the Imperial.  According to
Sir G. Bowyer, in the _Times_ of Nov. 10, 1871, ‘The Pope has been
dethroned, and all his dominions and property have been reduced to a
palace, a church, and a garden,’ it does not seem, therefore, very
probable that Rome in either shape will ever again tread down Jerusalem.
We may safely say that the first of the two oppressors is no more.

But what shall we say of the second? of that Turkey which is the only
power now treading down Jerusalem?  I would meet this by another
question.  Is there any politician in Europe who has the least
expectation of Turkey remaining in its present position for another ten
years?  Whatever little political power it retains is dying out as fast
as it can die.  Its exchequer is bankrupt.  Its credit is gone.  Its
character for good faith is at an end.  Its armies are unpaid.  Its
subject populations are rising against the intolerable burdens of its
injustice and oppression; and the Turks themselves have lost heart in the
melancholy conviction that their days are numbered.

Thus, of the two powers that have trodden down Jerusalem, one is already
extinct, and the head of the other at its last gasp.  The foot of the
Sick Man is the only foot now remaining on the neck of Jerusalem, and the
Sick Man is dying.  Surely it is not unreasonable to ask the question,
‘When he dies, why should not Jerusalem arise and be free?’

The result is that, without dwelling on any minute detail, we are brought
by the great, long-continued facts of European history, to the most
important conclusion that, in all probability, we are approaching the
time when Jerusalem shall no longer be trodden down of the Gentiles, and
when, therefore, the times of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled.  It is
only reasonable to suppose, that when the oppressors are taken out of the
way the oppression will come to an end; and, therefore, as one of those
two oppressors is already fallen, and the other falling so fast that all
the powers of Europe seem unable to keep him in his place, there is
surely good reason to hope that before long the captive will be free, and
that the time may not be far distant when we shall hear the cry, ‘Shake
thyself from the dust; arise and sit down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself
from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.’

And it certainly is a most remarkable fact that, simultaneously with the
consumption of Rome and the decay of Turkey, there has been a wonderful
awakening of interest in Jerusalem and the Jews.  The explorations in
Palestine are very like a fulfilment of the prophecy, ‘Thy servants take
pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof;’ and if they are,
there is good reason to hope that ‘the time to favour her, yea, the set
time, is come.’

But the interest in the people is more remarkable than that in the
country.  Before the great Evangelical revival at the commencement of
this century no one seemed to have any idea that the Jews had any part in
their own Messiah.  They were treated as an outcast people, and as for
their conversion, no one seems to have thought of attempting it until the
formation of the Society for Promoting Christianity among the Jews, in
the year 1808.  But now there are Christian missionaries labouring
amongst them in most of the principal towns of Europe, and, indeed, in
almost all the leading centres of their scattered population.  The New
Testament has been translated into Hebrew, and very nearly twenty-five
thousand copies are being annually circulated amongst the Jews.  The
state of feeling towards them has passed through a complete revolution,
so that of England it was said not long since by a learned and
influential Italian Jew, ‘God has blessed, and will bless, England;
because her great men, both in Church and State, take an interest in the
children of Jacob.’  Such facts are most important in themselves; but
when it is borne in mind that this interest in Jerusalem has been
awakened just at the time of the consumption of the political power of
Rome, and has been going on side by side with the decay of Turkey, it
certainly ought to lead all students of the Word of God to consider
carefully whether the times of the Gentiles may not be drawing to a
close, and the day of redemption may not be beginning to dawn on
Jerusalem.

But some may be disposed to say, How are we concerned with Jerusalem, and
what does it matter to us whether Jerusalem is trodden under foot, or
free?  I fear this is a very common feeling throughout society, and that
there are thousands and tens of thousands of professing Christians who
are perfectly indifferent as to the condition of Jerusalem.  But it ought
not so to be, for if it be a place cared for by the Lord, it ought to be
also cared for by his people.  Besides which, even on selfish principles,
we should take an interest in Jerusalem; for, as our position as Gentiles
in Christ Jesus is most intimately connected with the fall of Jerusalem,
so our brightest hopes in Him are bound up with its recovery.  In proof
of this I would ask you to turn to Ps. cii. 16, where you read, ‘When the
Lord shall build up Zion he shall appear in glory!’  The return of the
Lord is, therefore, connected with the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and,
whenever we see His hand restoring the city, we should begin to look out
in confident hope for the glorious and happy day when He Himself will
come to take the kingdom.  As a student of the Word of God I should be
very much surprised if He were to come before Jerusalem is raised from
the dust; but when it is raised, it seems clear from Scripture that there
will be nothing in the great prophetic series any longer to delay His
appearing.

So in our Lord’s discourse, as recorded by St. Matthew and St. Luke, we
are taught the same thing.  The object of the discourse is not, as has
been sometimes thought, to confound the taking of Jerusalem with the
Second Coming, but to distinguish them, and to warn the disciples against
the danger of mistaking the siege of Jerusalem for the coming of the
Lord.  It is the restoration of Jerusalem, not the fall, which is
connected with the Advent.  Our Lord, therefore, distinguishes between
the fall and the recovery, and describes the various signs that shall
precede each.  So up to Luke, xxi. 24, we find the description of the
desolation, concluding with the prophecy, ‘Jerusalem shall be trodden
down of the Gentiles until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled.’  But
in ver. 28 we find the promise of the glorious recovery in those sacred
words, ‘When these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift
up your heads, for your redemption draweth nigh.’  The 24th verse
describes the desolation, the 28th the restoration, and the whole long
period described as the times of the Gentiles, with the signs of the
latter days, intervenes between the two.  Now look at the account of the
redemption.  It includes clearly a release from the captivity, and the
rise of Jerusalem, when the time of its treading down shall have come to
an end.  But that is not all, or nearly so.  The redemption there
described is identified with the return of the Lord Himself; for in ver.
27 we read, ‘Then shall they see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with
power and great glory.’  Those then who pray for the peace of Jerusalem
will rejoice for Jerusalem’s sake in its recovery.  Those servants of God
who take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof, will have
their hearts gladdened when they see her rebuilt.  But that is not all,
or nearly all, for whenever that happens, the whole Church of God, and
every member of it in every nation under heaven, may look up, and lift up
their heads, for the Lord Himself will soon appear.  Once more, then, are
we taught our deep interest in the decay of Turkey.  When Turkey falls
there is every hope that Jerusalem will rise; and when Jerusalem rises,
the next thing for us to look out for will be the Advent of the Lord.
All Christians, therefore, should rejoice in the decline of the Ottoman
Empire, for the fall of the Mussulman is the hope of the Jew, and the
return of the Jew will be the blessed harbinger of the triumphant advent
of her glorious King.  Rome beat down Jerusalem, and Rome, as a political
power, is no more.  Turkey is now treading her down; but its decay is
begun, and its days are numbered: so that we may earnestly hope it will
be but a little while, possibly a very little while—within the lives of
many present—when the great promise of God shall be fulfilled, and,
according to the prophecy, ‘The moon shall be confounded, and the sun
ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in
Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously.’  God grant that all the
readers of this little book may be found looking for His appearing, and
ready to welcome Him with their lamps burning brightly, when the cry is
heard, ‘The Bridegroom cometh!’

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
          Printed by JOHN STRANGEWAYS, Castle St. Leicester Sq.

                                * * * * *

                         By the same Author. {0}

                                * * * * *

SANCTIFICATION: being Expository Sermons.

   Second Edition, enlarged.

   Square fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._

THE COMMUNION AND COMMUNICANT.

   Fourth Edition, revised and enlarged.

   Fcap. 8vo. sewed, 6_d._

BAPTISM.

   As Taught in the Bible and Prayer-book.

   Sixth Edition.  Fcap. 8vo. sewed, 4_d._

INSPIRATION: its Nature and Extent.

   Sewed, 6_d._

SERMONS FOR THE DAY.

   Fcap. 8vo. sewed, 6_d._

CONFORMITY TO THE WORLD.

   Third Edition.  Paper, 6_d._

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                          HATCHARDS, PICCADILLY.
               H. COLBRAN, CALVERLEY ROAD, TUNBRIDGE WELLS.




Footnotes


{26}  Hume, ii. 67.

{28}  I was interested, two days after preparing this lecture, by reading
the following sentence in the _Times_: ‘Upon every temporal consideration
Rome never was so low as she lies this day.’—_Times_, Dec. 15, 1873.

{0}  In this edition of the book the “By the same author” section appears
at the front of the book, before the title page.  It has been moved to
the end in the eText for clarity.—DP.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROME, TURKEY, AND JERUSALEM***


******* This file should be named 39290-0.txt or 39290-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/9/2/9/39290



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gentlemen's Book of Etiquette and
Manual of Politeness, by Cecil B. Hartley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Gentlemen's Book of Etiquette and Manual of Politeness
       Being a Complete Guide for a Gentleman's Conduct in all
       his Relations Towards Society

Author: Cecil B. Hartley

Release Date: March 28, 2012 [EBook #39293]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOOK OF ETIQUETTE ***




Produced by Julia Miller, S.D., and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









  THE

  GENTLEMEN’S BOOK OF ETIQUETTE,

  AND

  MANUAL OF POLITENESS;

  BEING

  A COMPLETE GUIDE FOR A GENTLEMAN’S CONDUCT IN ALL
  HIS RELATIONS TOWARDS SOCIETY.

  CONTAINING

  RULES FOR THE ETIQUETTE TO BE OBSERVED IN THE STREET, AT
  TABLE, IN THE BALL ROOM, EVENING PARTY, AND MORNING
  CALL; WITH FULL DIRECTIONS FOR POLITE CORRESPONDENCE,
  DRESS, CONVERSATION, MANLY EXERCISES,
  AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS.

  FROM THE BEST FRENCH, ENGLISH, AND AMERICAN AUTHORITIES.

  BY
  CECIL B. HARTLEY.

  BOSTON:
  G. W. COTTRELL, PUBLISHER,
  36 CORNHILL.


Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1860, by

G. G. EVANS,

in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court for the Eastern District of
Pennsylvania.




INTRODUCTION.


Man was not intended to live like a bear or a hermit, apart from others
of his own nature, and, philosophy and reason will each agree with me,
that man was born for sociability and finds his true delight in society.
Society is a word capable of many meanings, and used here in each and
all of them. Society, _par excellence_; the world at large; the little
clique to which he is bound by early ties; the companionship of friends
or relatives; even society _tete a tete_ with one dear sympathizing
soul, are pleasant states for a man to be in.

Taking the word in its most extended view, it is the world; but in the
light we wish to impress in our book it is the smaller world of the
changing, pleasant intercourse of each city or town in which our reader
may chance to abide.

This society, composed, as it is, of many varying natures and elements,
where each individual must submit to merge his own identity into the
universal whole, which makes the word and state, is divided and
subdivided into various cliques, and has a pastime for every
disposition, grave or gay; and with each division rises up a new set of
forms and ceremonies to be observed if you wish to glide down the
current of polite life, smoothly and pleasantly.

The young man who makes his first entrance into the world of society,
should know how to choose his friends, and next how to conduct himself
towards them. Experience is, of course, the best guide, but at first
starting this must come second hand, from an older friend, or from
books.

A judicious friend is the best guide; but how is the young man to know
whom to choose? When at home this friend is easily selected; but in this
country, where each bird leaves the parent nest as soon as his wings
will bear him safely up, there are but few who stay amongst the friends
at home.

Next then comes the instruction from books.

True a book will not fully supply the place either of experience or
friendly advice, still it may be made useful, and, carefully written
from the experience of heads grown gray in society, with only well
authenticated rules, it will be a guide not to be despised by the young
aspirant for favor in polite and refined circles.

You go into society from mixed motives; partly for pleasure, recreation
after the fatigues of your daily duties, and partly that you may become
known. In a republican country where one man’s opportunities for rising
are as good as those of another, ambition will lead every rising man
into society.

You may set it down as a rule, that as you treat the world, so the world
will treat you. Carry into the circles of society a refined, polished
manner, and an amiable desire to please, and it will meet you with
smiling grace, and lead you forward pleasantly along the flowery paths;
go, on the contrary, with a brusque, rude manner, startling all the
silky softness before you with cut and thrust remarks, carrying only
the hard realities of life in your hand, and you will find society armed
to meet you, showing only sharp corners and thorny places for your
blundering footsteps to stumble against.

You will find in every circle that etiquette holds some sway; her rule
is despotic in some places, in others mild, and easily set aside. Your
first lesson in society will be to study where she reigns supreme, in
her crown and holding her sceptre, and where she only glides in with a
gentle hint or so, and timidly steps out if rebuked; and let your
conduct be governed by the result of your observations. You will soon
become familiar with the signs, and tell on your first entrance into a
room whether kid gloves and exquisite finish of manner will be
appropriate, or whether it is “hail, fellow, well met” with the inmates.
Remember, however, “once a gentleman always a gentleman,” and be sure
that you can so carry out the rule, that in your most careless, joyous
moments, when freest from the restraints of etiquette, you can still be
recognizable as a _gentleman_ by every act, word, or look.

Avoid too great a restraint of manner. Stiffness is not politeness, and,
while you observe every rule, you may appear to heed none. To make your
politeness part of yourself, inseparable from every action, is the
height of gentlemanly elegance and finish of manner.




CONTENTS.


                                                     PAGE

    INTRODUCTION                                        3

  CHAPTER I.

    CONVERSATION                                       11

  CHAPTER II.

    POLITENESS                                         31

  CHAPTER III.

    TABLE ETIQUETTE                                    50

  CHAPTER IV.

    ETIQUETTE IN THE STREET                            66

  CHAPTER V.

    ETIQUETTE FOR CALLING                              75

  CHAPTER VI.

    ETIQUETTE FOR THE BALL ROOM                        91

  CHAPTER VII.

    DRESS                                             116

  CHAPTER VIII.

    MANLY EXERCISES                                   154

  CHAPTER IX.

    TRAVELING                                         176

  CHAPTER X.

    ETIQUETTE IN CHURCH                               183

  CHAPTER XI.

    ONE HUNDRED HINTS FOR GENTLEMANLY DEPORTMENT      186

  CHAPTER XII.

    PARTIES                                           222

  CHAPTER XIII.

    COURTESY AT HOME                                  228

  CHAPTER XIV.

    TRUE COURTESY                                     244

  CHAPTER XV.

    LETTER WRITING                                    252

  CHAPTER XVI.

    WEDDING ETIQUETTE                                 280

  CHAPTER XVII.

    ETIQUETTE FOR PLACES OF AMUSEMENT                 294

  CHAPTER XVIII.

    MISCELLANEOUS                                     298




GENTLEMEN’S BOOK OF ETIQUETTE.




CHAPTER I.

CONVERSATION.


One of the first rules for a guide in polite conversation, is to avoid
political or religious discussions in general society. Such discussions
lead almost invariably to irritating differences of opinion, often to
open quarrels, and a coolness of feeling which might have been avoided
by dropping the distasteful subject as soon as marked differences of
opinion arose. It is but one out of many that can discuss either
political or religious differences, with candor and judgment, and yet so
far control his language and temper as to avoid either giving or taking
offence.

In their place, in circles which have met for such discussions, in a
_tête à tête_ conversation, in a small party of gentlemen where each is
ready courteously to listen to the others, politics may be discussed
with perfect propriety, but in the drawing-room, at the dinner-table, or
in the society of ladies, these topics are best avoided.

If you are drawn into such a discussion without intending to be so, be
careful that your individual opinion does not lead you into language
and actions unbecoming a gentleman. Listen courteously to those whose
opinions do not agree with yours, and _keep your temper_. A man in a
passion ceases to be a gentleman.

Even if convinced that your opponent is utterly wrong, yield gracefully,
decline further discussion, or dextrously turn the conversation, but do
not obstinately defend your own opinion until you become angry, or more
excited than is becoming to a gentleman.

Many there are who, giving their opinion, not as an _opinion_ but as a
_law_, will defend their position by such phrases, as: “Well, if _I_
were president, or governor, I would,” &c.--and while by the warmth of
their argument they prove that they are utterly unable to govern their
own temper, they will endeavor to persuade you that they are perfectly
competent to take charge of the government of the nation.

Retain, if you will, a fixed political opinion, yet do not parade it
upon all occasions, and, above all, do not endeavor to _force_ others to
agree with you. Listen calmly to their ideas upon the same subjects, and
if you cannot agree, differ politely, and while your opponent may set
you down as a bad politician, let him be obliged to admit that you are a
_gentleman_.

Wit and vivacity are two highly important ingredients in the
conversation of a man in polite society, yet a straining for effect, or
forced wit, is in excessively bad taste. There is no one more
insupportable in society than the everlasting talkers who scatter puns,
witticisms, and jokes with so profuse a hand that they become as
tiresome as a comic newspaper, and whose loud laugh at their own wit
drowns other voices which might speak matter more interesting. The
really witty man does not shower forth his wit so indiscriminately; his
charm consists in wielding his powerful weapon delicately and easily,
and making each highly polished witticism come in the right place and
moment to be effectual. While real wit is a most delightful gift, and
its use a most charming accomplishment, it is, like many other bright
weapons, dangerous to use too often. You may wound where you meant only
to amuse, and remarks which you mean only in for general applications,
may be construed into personal affronts, so, if you have the gift, use
it wisely, and not too freely.

The most important requisite for a good conversational power is
education, and, by this is meant, not merely the matter you may store in
your memory from observation or books, though this is of vast
importance, but it also includes the developing of the mental powers,
and, above all, the comprehension. An English writer says, “A man should
be able, in order to enter into conversation, to catch rapidly the
meaning of anything that is advanced; for instance, though you know
nothing of science, you should not be obliged to stare and be silent,
when a man who does understand it is explaining a new discovery or a new
theory; though you have not read a word of Blackstone, your
comprehensive powers should be sufficiently acute to enable you to take
in the statement that may be made of a recent cause; though you may not
have read some particular book, you should be capable of appreciating
the criticism which you hear of it. Without such power--simple enough,
and easily attained by attention and practice, yet too seldom met with
in general society--a conversation which departs from the most ordinary
topics cannot be maintained without the risk of lapsing into a lecture;
with such power, society becomes instructive as well as amusing, and you
have no remorse at an evening’s end at having wasted three or four hours
in profitless banter, or simpering platitudes. This facility of
comprehension often startles us in some women, whose education we know
to have been poor, and whose reading is limited. If they did not rapidly
receive your ideas, they could not, therefore, be fit companions for
intellectual men, and it is, perhaps, their consciousness of a
deficiency which leads them to pay the more attention to what you say.
It is this which makes married women so much more agreeable to men of
thought than young ladies, as a rule, can be, for they are accustomed to
the society of a husband, and the effort to be a companion to his mind
has engrafted the habit of attention and ready reply.”

The same author says: “No less important is the cultivation of taste. If
it is tiresome and deadening to be with people who cannot understand,
and will not even appear to be interested in your better thoughts, it is
almost repulsive to find a man insensible to all beauty, and immovable
by any horror.

“In the present day an acquaintance with art, even if you have no love
for it, is a _sine quâ non_ of good society. Music and painting are
subjects which will be discussed in every direction around you. It is
only in bad society that people go to the opera, concerts, and
art-exhibitions merely because it is the fashion, or to say they have
been there; and if you confessed to such a weakness in really good
society, you would be justly voted a puppy. For this, too, some book
knowledge is indispensable. You should at least know the names of the
more celebrated artists, composers, architects, sculptors, and so forth,
and should be able to approximate their several schools.

“So too, you should know pretty accurately the pronunciation of
celebrated names, or, if not, take care not to use them. It will never
do to be ignorant of the names and approximate ages of great composers,
especially in large cities, where music is so highly appreciated and so
common a theme. It will be decidedly condemnatory if you talk of the
_new_ opera ‘Don Giovanni,’ or _Rossini’s_ ‘Trovatore,’ or are ignorant
who composed ‘Fidelio,’ and in what opera occur such common pieces as
‘_Ciascun lo dice_,’ or ‘_Il segreto_.’ I do not say that these trifles
are indispensable, and when a man has better knowledge to offer,
especially with genius or ‘cleverness’ to back it, he will not only be
pardoned for an ignorance of them, but can even take a high tone, and
profess indifference or contempt of them. But, at the same time, such
ignorance stamps an ordinary man, and hinders conversation. On the other
hand the best society will not endure dilettantism, and, whatever the
knowledge a man may possess of any art, he must not display it so as to
make the ignorance of others painful to them. But this applies to every
topic. To have only one or two subjects to converse on, and to discourse
rather than talk on them, is always ill-bred, whether the theme be
literature or horseflesh. The gentleman jockey will probably denounce
the former as a ‘bore,’ and call us pedants for dwelling on it; but if,
as is too often the case, he can give us nothing more general than the
discussion of the ‘points’ of a horse that, perhaps, we have never seen,
he is as great a pedant in his way.

“_Reason_ plays a less conspicuous part in good society because its
frequenters are too reasonable to be mere reasoners. A disputation is
always dangerous to temper, and tedious to those who cannot feel as
eager as the disputants; a discussion, on the other hand, in which every
body has a chance of stating amicably and unobtrusively his or her
opinion, must be of frequent occurrence. But to cultivate the reason,
besides its high moral value, has the advantage of enabling one to reply
as well as attend to the opinions of others. Nothing is more tedious or
disheartening than a perpetual, ‘Yes, just so,’ and nothing more.
Conversation must never be one-sided. Then, again, the reason enables us
to support a fancy or an opinion, when we are asked _why_ we think so.
To reply, ‘I don’t know, but still I think so,’ is silly and tedious.

“But there is a part of our education so important and so neglected in
our schools and colleges, that it cannot be too highly impressed on the
young man who proposes to enter society. I mean that which we learn
first of all things, yet often have not learned fully when death eases
us of the necessity--the art of speaking our own language. What can
Greek and Latin, French and German be for us in our every-day life, if
we have not acquired this? We are often encouraged to raise a laugh at
Doctor Syntax and the tyranny of Grammar, but we may be certain that
more misunderstandings, and, therefore, more difficulties arise between
men in the commonest intercourse from a want of grammatical precision
than from any other cause. It was once the fashion to neglect grammar,
as it now is with certain people to write illegibly, and, in the days of
Goethe, a man thought himself a genius if he could spell badly.

“Precision and accuracy must begin in the very outset; and if we neglect
them in grammar, we shall scarcely acquire them in expressing our
thoughts. But since there is no society without interchange of thought,
and since the best society is that in which the best thoughts are
interchanged in the best and most comprehensible manner, it follows that
a proper mode of expressing ourselves is indispensable in good society.

“The art of expressing one’s thoughts neatly and suitably is one which,
in the neglect of rhetoric as a study, we must practice for ourselves.
The commonest thought well put is more useful in a social point of view,
than the most brilliant idea jumbled out. What is well expressed is
easily seized, and therefore readily responded to; the most poetic fancy
may be lost to the hearer, if the language which conveys it is obscure.
Speech is the gift which distinguishes man from animals, and makes
society possible. He has but a poor appreciation of his high privilege
as a human being, who neglects to cultivate, ‘God’s great gift of
speech.’

“As I am not writing for men of genius, but for ordinary beings, I am
right to state that an indispensable part of education is a knowledge of
the literature of the English language. But _how_ to read, is, for
society more important than _what_ we read. The man who takes up nothing
but a newspaper, but reads it to _think_, to deduct conclusions from its
premises, and form a judgment on its opinions, is more fitted for
society than he, who having all the current literature and devoting his
whole time to its perusal, swallows it all without digestion. In fact,
the mind must be treated like the body, and however great its appetite,
it will soon fall into bad health if it gorges, but does not ruminate.
At the same time an acquaintance with the best current literature is
necessary to modern society, and it is not sufficient to have read a
book without being able to pass a judgment upon it. Conversation on
literature is impossible, when your respondent can only say, ‘Yes. I
like the book, but I really don’t know why.’

“An acquaintance with old English literature is not perhaps
indispensable, but it gives a man great advantage in all kinds of
society, and in some he is at a constant loss without it. The same may
be said of foreign literature, which in the present day is almost as
much discussed as our own; but, on the other hand, an acquaintance with
home and foreign politics, with current history, and subjects of passing
interest, is absolutely necessary; and a person of sufficient
intelligence to join in good society, cannot dispense with his daily
newspaper, his literary journal, and the principal reviews and
magazines. The cheapness of every kind of literature, the facilities of
our well stored circulating libraries, our public reading rooms, and
numerous excellent lectures on every possible subject, leave no excuse
to poor or rich for an ignorance of any of the topics discussed in
intellectual society. You may forget your Latin, Greek, French, German,
and Mathematics, but if you frequent good company, you will never be
allowed to forget that you are a citizen of the world.”

A man of real intelligence and cultivated mind, is generally modest. He
may feel when in every day society, that in intellectual acquirements he
is above those around him; but he will not seek to make his companions
feel their inferiority, nor try to display this advantage over them. He
will discuss with frank simplicity the topics started by others, and
endeavor to avoid starting such as they will not feel inclined to
discuss. All that he says will be marked by politeness and deference to
the feelings and opinions of others.

La Bruyere says, “The great charm of conversation consists less in the
display of one’s own wit and intelligence, than in the power to draw
forth the resources of others; he who leaves you after a long
conversation, pleased with himself and the part he has taken in the
discourse, will be your warmest admirer. Men do not care to admire you,
they wish you to be pleased with them; they do not seek for instruction
or even amusement from your discourse, but they do wish you to be made
acquainted with their talents and powers of conversation; and the true
man of genius will delicately make all who come in contact with him,
feel the exquisite satisfaction of knowing that they have appeared to
advantage.”

Having admitted the above to be an incontestable fact, you will also see
that it is as great an accomplishment to listen with an air of interest
and attention, as it is to speak well.

To be a good listener is as indispensable as to be a good talker, and it
is in the character of listener that you can most readily detect the man
who is accustomed to good society. Nothing is more embarrassing to any
one who is speaking, than to perceive signs of weariness or inattention
in the person whom he addresses.

Never interrupt any one who is speaking; it is quite as rude to
officiously supply a name or date about which another hesitates, unless
you are asked to do so. Another gross breach of etiquette, is to
anticipate the point of a story which another person is reciting, or to
take it from his lips to finish it in your own language. Some persons
plead as an excuse for this breach of etiquette, that the reciter was
spoiling a good story by a bad manner, but this does not mend the
matter. It is surely rude to give a man to understand that you do not
consider him capable of finishing an anecdote that he has commenced.

It is ill-bred to put on an air of weariness during a long speech from
another person, and quite as rude to look at a watch, read a letter,
flirt the leaves of a book, or in any other action show that you are
tired of the speaker or his subject.

In a general conversation, never speak when another person is speaking,
and never try by raising your own voice to drown that of another. Never
assume an air of haughtiness, or speak in a dictatorial manner; let your
conversation be always amiable and frank, free from every affectation.

Put yourself on the same level as the person to whom you speak, and
under penalty of being considered a pedantic idiot, refraining from
explaining any expression or word that you may use.

Never, unless you are requested to do so, speak of your own business or
profession in society; to confine your conversation entirely to the
subject or pursuit which is your own speciality is low-bred and vulgar.

Make the subject for conversation suit the company in which you are
placed. Joyous, light conversation will be at times as much out of
place, as a sermon would be at a dancing party. Let your conversation be
grave or gay as suits the time or place.

In a dispute, if you cannot reconcile the parties, withdraw from them.
You will surely make one enemy, perhaps two, by taking either side, in
an argument when the speakers have lost their temper.

Never gesticulate in every day conversation, unless you wish to be
mistaken for a fifth rate comedian.

Never ask any one who is conversing with you to repeat his words.
Nothing is ruder than to say, “Pardon me, will you repeat that
sentence--I did not hear you at first,” and thus imply that your
attention was wandering when he first spoke.

Never, during a general conversation, endeavor to concentrate the
attention wholly upon yourself. It is quite as rude to enter into
conversation with one of a group, and endeavor to draw him out of the
circle of general conversation to talk with you alone.

Never listen to the conversation of two persons who have thus withdrawn
from a group. If they are so near you that you cannot avoid hearing
them, you may, with perfect propriety, change your seat.

Make your own share in conversation as modest and brief as is consistent
with the subject under consideration, and avoid long speeches and
tedious stories. If, however, another, particularly an old man, tells a
long story, or one that is not new to you, listen respectfully until he
has finished, before you speak again.

Speak of yourself but little. Your friends will find out your virtues
without forcing you to tell them, and you may feel confident that it is
equally unnecessary to expose your faults yourself.

If you submit to flattery, you must also submit to the imputation of
folly and self-conceit.

In speaking of your friends, do not compare them, one with another.
Speak of the merits of each one, but do not try to heighten the virtues
of one by contrasting them with the vices of another.

No matter how absurd are the anecdotes that may be told in your
presence, you must never give any sign of incredulity. They may be true;
and even if false, good breeding forces you to hear them with polite
attention, and the appearance of belief. To show by word or sign any
token of incredulity, is to give the lie to the narrator, and that is an
unpardonable insult.

Avoid, in conversation all subjects which can injure the absent. A
gentleman will never calumniate or listen to calumny.

Need I say that no gentleman will ever soil his mouth with an oath.
Above all, to swear in a drawing-room or before ladies is not only
indelicate and vulgar in the extreme, but evinces a shocking ignorance
of the rules of polite society and good breeding.

For a long time the world has adopted a certain form of speech which is
used in good society, and which changing often, is yet one of the
distinctive marks of a gentleman. A word or even a phrase which has been
used among the most refined circles, will, sometimes, by a sudden freak
of fashion, from being caricatured in a farce or song, or from some
other cause, go entirely out of use. Nothing but habitual intercourse
with people of refinement and education, and mingling in general
society, will teach a gentleman what words to use and what to avoid. Yet
there are some words which are now entirely out of place in a parlor.

Avoid a declamatory style; some men, before speaking, will wave their
hands as if commanding silence, and, having succeeded in obtaining the
attention of the company, will speak in a tone, and style, perfectly
suitable for the theatre or lecture room, but entirely out of place in a
parlor. Such men entirely defeat the object of society, for they resent
interruption, and, as their talk flows in a constant stream, no one else
can speak without interrupting the pompous idiot who thus endeavors to
engross the entire attention of the circle around him.

This character will be met with constantly, and generally joins to the
other disagreeable traits an egotism as tiresome as it is ill-bred.

The wittiest man becomes tedious and ill-bred when he endeavors to
engross entirely the attention of the company in which he should take a
more modest part.

Avoid set phrases, and use quotations but rarely. They sometimes make a
very piquant addition to conversation, but when they become a constant
habit, they are exceedingly tedious, and in bad taste.

Avoid pedantry; it is a mark, not of intelligence, but stupidity.

Speak your own language correctly; at the same time do not be too great
a stickler for formal correctness of phrases.

Never notice it if others make mistakes in language. To notice by word
or look such errors in those around you, is excessively ill-bred.

Vulgar language and slang, though in common, unfortunately too common
use, are unbecoming in any one who pretends to be a gentleman. Many of
the words heard now in the parlor and drawing-room, derive their origin
from sources which a gentleman would hesitate to mention before ladies,
yet he will make daily use of the offensive word or phrase.

If you are a professional or scientific man, avoid the use of technical
terms. They are in bad taste, because many will not understand them. If,
however, you unconsciously use such a term or phrase, do not then commit
the still greater error of explaining its meaning. No one will thank you
for thus implying their ignorance.

In conversing with a foreigner who speaks imperfect English, listen with
strict attention, yet do not supply a word, or phrase, if he hesitates.
Above all, do not by a word or gesture show impatience if he makes
pauses or blunders. If you understand his language, say so when you
first speak to him; this is not making a display of your own knowledge,
but is a kindness, as a foreigner will be pleased to hear and speak his
own language when in a strange country.

Be careful in society never to play the part of buffoon, for you will
soon become known as the “funny” man of the party, and no character is
so perilous to your dignity as a gentleman. You lay yourself open to
both censure and ridicule, and you may feel sure that, for every person
who laughs with you, two are laughing at you, and for one who admires
you, two will watch your antics with secret contempt.

Avoid boasting. To speak of your money, connections, or the luxuries at
your command is in very bad taste. It is quite as ill-bred to boast of
your intimacy with distinguished people. If their names occur naturally
in the course of conversation, it is very well; but to be constantly
quoting, “my friend, Gov. C----,” or “my intimate friend, the
president,” is pompous and in bad taste.

While refusing the part of jester yourself, do not, by stiff manners, or
cold, contemptuous looks, endeavor to check the innocent mirth of
others. It is in excessively bad taste to drag in a grave subject of
conversation when pleasant, bantering talk is going on around you. Join
in pleasantly and forget your graver thoughts for the time, and you will
win more popularity than if you chill the merry circle or turn their
innocent gayety to grave discussions.

When thrown into the society of literary people, do not question them
about their works. To speak in terms of admiration of any work to the
author is in bad taste; but you may give pleasure, if, by a quotation
from their writings, or a happy reference to them, you prove that you
have read and appreciated them.

It is extremely rude and pedantic, when engaged in general conversation,
to make quotations in a foreign language.

To use phrases which admit of a double meaning, is ungentlemanly, and,
if addressed to a lady, they become positively insulting.

If you find you are becoming angry in a conversation, either turn to
another subject or keep silence. You may utter, in the heat of passion,
words which you would never use in a calmer moment, and which you would
bitterly repent when they were once said.

“Never talk of ropes to a man whose father was hanged” is a vulgar but
popular proverb. Avoid carefully subjects which may be construed into
personalities, and keep a strict reserve upon family matters. Avoid, if
you can, seeing the skeleton in your friend’s closet, but if it is
paraded for your special benefit, regard it as a sacred confidence, and
never betray your knowledge to a third party.

If you have traveled, although you will endeavor to improve your mind in
such travel, do not be constantly speaking of your journeyings. Nothing
is more tiresome than a man who commences every phrase with, “When I was
in Paris,” or, “In Italy I saw----.”

When asking questions about persons who are not known to you, in a
drawing-room, avoid using adjectives; or you may enquire of a mother,
“Who is that awkward, ugly girl?” and be answered, “Sir, that is my
daughter.”

Avoid gossip; in a woman it is detestable, but in a man it is utterly
despicable.

Do not officiously offer assistance or advice in general society. Nobody
will thank you for it.

Ridicule and practical joking are both marks of a vulgar mind and low
breeding.

Avoid flattery. A delicate compliment is permissible in conversation,
but flattery is broad, coarse, and to sensible people, disgusting. If
you flatter your superiors, they will distrust you, thinking you have
some selfish end; if you flatter ladies, they will despise you, thinking
you have no other conversation.

A lady of sense will feel more complimented if you converse with her
upon instructive, high subjects, than if you address to her only the
language of compliment. In the latter case she will conclude that you
consider her incapable of discussing higher subjects, and you cannot
expect her to be pleased at being considered merely a silly, vain
person, who must be flattered into good humor.

Avoid the evil of giving utterance to inflated expressions and remarks
in common conversation.

It is a somewhat ungrateful task to tell those who would shrink from the
imputation of a falsehood that they are in the daily habit of uttering
untruths; and yet, if I proceed, no other course than this can be taken
by me. It is of no use to adopt half measures; plain speaking saves a
deal of trouble.

The examples about to be given by me of exaggerated expressions, are
only a few of the many that are constantly in use. Whether you can
acquit yourselves of the charge of occasionally using them, I cannot
tell; but I dare not affirm for myself that I am altogether guiltless.

“I was caught in the wet last night, the rain came down in torrents.”
Most of us have been out in heavy rains; but a torrent of water pouring
down from the skies would a little surprise us, after all.

“I am wet to the skin, and have not a dry thread upon me.” Where these
expressions are once used correctly, they are used twenty times in
opposition to the truth.

“I tried to overtake him, but in vain; for he ran like lightning.” The
celebrated racehorse Eclipse is said to have run a mile in a minute, but
poor Eclipse is left sadly behind by this expression.

“He kept me standing out in the cold so long, I thought I should have
waited for ever.” There is not a particle of probability that such a
thought could have been for one moment entertained.

“As I came across the common, the wind was as keen as a razor.” This is
certainly a very keen remark, but the worst of it is that its keenness
far exceeds its correctness.

“I went to the meeting, but had hard work to get in; for the place was
crowded to suffocation.” In this case, in justice to the veracity of the
relater, it is necessary to suppose that successful means had been used
for his recovery.

“It must have been a fine sight; I would have given the world to have
seen it.” Fond as most of us are of sight-seeing, this would be buying
pleasure at a dear price indeed; but it is an easy thing to proffer to
part with that which we do not possess.

“It made me quite low spirited; my heart felt as heavy as lead.” We most
of us know what a heavy heart is; but lead is by no means the most
correct metaphor to use in speaking of a heavy heart.

“I could hardly find my way, for the night was as dark as pitch.” I am
afraid we have all in our turn calumniated the sky in this manner; pitch
is many shades darker than the darkest night we have ever known.

“I have told him of that fault fifty times over.” Five times would, in
all probability, be much nearer the fact than fifty.

“I never closed my eyes all night long.” If this be true, you acted
unwisely; for had you closed your eyes, you might, perhaps, have fallen
asleep, and enjoyed the blessing of refreshing slumber; if it be not
true, you acted more unwisely still, by stating that as a fact which is
altogether untrue.

“He is as tall as a church-spire.” I have met with some tall fellows in
my time, though the spire of a church is somewhat taller than the
tallest of them.

“You may buy a fish at the market as big as a jackass, for five
shillings.” I certainly have my doubts about this matter; but if it be
really true, the market people must be jackasses indeed to sell such
large fishes for so little money.

“He was so fat he could hardly come in at the door.” Most likely the
difficulty here alluded to was never felt by any one but the relater;
supposing it to be otherwise, the man must have been very broad or the
door very narrow.

“You don’t say so!--why, it was enough to kill him!” The fact that it
did not kill him is a sufficient reply to this unfounded observation;
but no remark can be too absurd for an unbridled tongue.

Thus might I run on for an hour, and after all leave much unsaid on the
subject of exaggerated expressions. We are hearing continually the
comparisons, “black as soot, white as snow, hot as fire, cold as ice,
sharp as a needle, dull as a door-nail, light as a feather, heavy as
lead, stiff as a poker, and crooked as a crab-tree,” in cases where such
expressions are quite out of order.

The practice of expressing ourselves in this inflated and thoughtless
way, is more mischievous than we are aware of. It certainly leads us to
sacrifice truth; to misrepresent what we mean faithfully to describe; to
whiten our own characters, and sometimes to blacken the reputation of a
neighbor. There is an uprightness in speech as well as in action, that
we ought to strive hard to attain. The purity of truth is sullied, and
the standard of integrity is lowered, by incorrect observations. Let us
reflect upon this matter freely and faithfully. Let us love truth,
follow truth, and practice truth in our thoughts, our words, and our
deeds.




CHAPTER II.

POLITENESS.


Real politeness is the outward expression of the most generous impulses
of the heart. It enforces unselfishness, benevolence, kindness, and the
golden rule, “Do unto others as you would others should do unto you.”
Thus its first principle is love for the neighbor, loving him as
yourself.

When in society it would often be exceedingly difficult to decide how to
treat those who are personally disagreeable to us, if it were not for
the rules of politeness, and the little formalities and points of
etiquette which these rules enforce. These evidences of polite breeding
do not prove hypocrisy, as you may treat your most bitter enemy with
perfect courtesy, and yet make no protestations of friendship.

If politeness is but a mask, as many philosophers tell us, it is a mask
which will win love and admiration, and is better worn than cast aside.
If you wear it with the sincere desire to give pleasure to others, and
make all the little meetings of life pass off smoothly and agreeably, it
will soon cease to be a mask, but you will find that the manner which
you at first put on to give pleasure, has become natural to you, and
wherever you have assumed a virtue to please others, you will find the
virtue becoming habitual and finally natural, and part of yourself.

Do not look upon the rules of etiquette as deceptions. They are just as
often vehicles for the expression of sincere feeling, as they are the
mask to conceal a want of it.

You will in society meet with men who rail against politeness, and call
it deceit and hypocrisy. Watch these men when they have an object to
gain, or are desirous of making a favorable impression, and see them
tacitly, but unconsciously, admit the power of courtesy, by dropping for
the time, their uncouth ways, to affect the politeness, they oftentimes
do not feel.

Pass over the defects of others, be prudent, discreet, at the proper
time reserved, yet at other times frank, and treat others with the same
gentle courtesy you would wish extended to yourself.

True politeness never embarrasses any one, because its first object is
to put all at their ease, while it leaves to all perfect freedom of
action. You must meet rudeness from others by perfect politeness and
polish of manner on your own part, and you will thus shame those who
have been uncivil to you. You will more readily make them blush by your
courtesy, than if you met their rudeness by ill manners on your own
part.

While a favor may be doubled in value, by a frankly courteous manner of
granting it, a refusal will lose half its bitterness if your manner
shows polite regret at your inability to oblige him who asks the favor
at your hand.

Politeness may be extended to the lowest and meanest, and you will
never by thus extending it detract from your own dignity. A _gentleman_
may and will treat his washerwoman with respect and courtesy, and his
boot-black with pleasant affability, yet preserve perfectly his own
position. To really merit the name of a polite, finished gentleman, you
must be polite at all times and under all circumstances.

There is a difference between politeness and etiquette. Real politeness
is in-born, and may exist in the savage, while etiquette is the outward
expression of politeness reduced to the rules current in good society.

A man may be polite, really so in heart, yet show in every movement an
ignorance of the rules of etiquette, and offend against the laws of
society. You may find him with his elbows upon the table, or tilting his
chair in a parlor. You may see him commit every hour gross breaches of
etiquette, yet you will never hear him intentionally utter one word to
