the habits and constitution of the subject. If it cures asthma, it may
destroy digestion; if it soothes the nerves, it may, in excess, produce
a chronic irritability.

“But I will regard it in a social point of view; and, first, as a
narcotic, notice its effects on the individual character. I believe,
then, that in moderation it diminishes the violence of the passions,
and, particularly, that of the temper. Interested in the subject, I have
taken care to seek instances of members of the same family having the
same violent tempers by inheritance, of whom the one has been calmed
down by smoking, and the other gone on in his passionate course. I
believe that it induces a habit of calm reflectiveness, which causes us
to take less prejudiced, perhaps less zealous views of life, and to be,
therefore, less irritable in our converse with our fellow creatures. I
am inclined to think that the clergy, the squirearchy, and the peasantry
are the most prejudiced and most violent classes in this country; there
may be other reasons for this, but it is noteworthy that these are the
classes which smoke least. On the other hand, I confess that it induces
a certain lassitude, and a lounging, easy mode of life, which are fatal
both to the precision of manners and the vivacity of conversation. The
mind of a smoker is contemplative rather than active; and if the weed
cures our irritability, it kills our wit. I believe that it is a fallacy
to suppose that it encourages drinking. There is more drinking and less
smoking in England than in any other country of the civilized world.
There was more drinking among the gentry of last century, who never
smoked at all. Smoke and wine do not go well together. Coffee or beer
are its best accompaniments, and the one cannot intoxicate, the other
must be largely imbibed to do so. I have observed among young bachelors
that very little wine is drunk in their chambers, and that beer is
gradually taking its place. The cigar, too, is an excuse for rising from
the dinner-table where there are no ladies to go to.

“In another point of view, I am inclined to think that smoking has
conduced to make the society of men, when alone, less riotous, less
quarrelsome, and even less vicious than it was. Where young men now blow
a common cloud, they were formerly driven to a fearful consumption of
wine, and this in their heads, they were ready and roused to any
iniquity. But the pipe is the bachelor’s wife. With it he can endure
solitude longer, and is not forced into low society in order to shun it.
With it, too, the idle can pass many an hour, which otherwise he would
have given, not to work, but to extravagant devilries. With it he is no
longer restless and impatient for excitement of any kind. We never hear
now of young blades issuing in bands from their wine to beat the watch
or disturb the slumbering citizens, as we did thirty or forty years ago,
when smoking was still a rarity; they are all puffing harmlessly in
their chambers now. But, on the other hand, I foresee with dread a too
tender allegiance to the pipe, to the destruction of good society, and
the abandonment of the ladies. No wonder they hate it, dear creatures;
the pipe is the worst rival a woman can have, and it is one whose eyes
she cannot scratch out; who improves with age, while she herself
declines; who has an art which no woman possesses, that of never
wearying her devotee; who is silent, yet a companion; costs little, yet
gives much pleasure; who, lastly, never upbraids, and always yields the
same joy. Ah! this is a powerful rival to wife or maid, and no wonder
that at last the woman succumbs, consents, and, rather than lose her
lord or master, even supplies the hated herb with her own fair hands.

“There are rules to limit this indulgence. One must never smoke, nor
even ask to smoke, in the company of the fair. If they know that in a
few minutes you will be running off to your cigar, the fair will do
well--say it is in a garden, or so--to allow you to bring it out and
smoke it there. One must never smoke, again, in the streets; that is, in
daylight. The deadly crime may be committed, like burglary, after dark,
but not before. One must never smoke in a room inhabited at times by the
ladies; thus, a well-bred man who has a wife or sisters, will not offer
to smoke in the dining-room after dinner. One must never smoke in a
public place, where ladies are or might be, for instance, a flower-show
or promenade. One may smoke in a railway-carriage in spite of by-laws,
if one has first obtained the consent of every one present; but if there
be a lady there, though she give her consent, smoke not. In nine cases
out of ten, she will give it from good nature. One must never smoke in a
close carriage; one may ask and obtain leave to smoke when returning
from a pic-nic or expedition in an open carriage. One must never smoke
in a theatre, on a race-course, nor in church. This last is not,
perhaps, a needless caution. In the Belgian churches you see a placard
announcing, ‘Ici on ne mâche pas du tabac.’ One must never smoke when
anybody shows an objection to it. One must never smoke a pipe in the
streets; one must never smoke at all in the coffee-room of a hotel. One
must never smoke, without consent, in the presence of a clergyman, and
one must never offer a cigar to any ecclesiastic.

“But if you smoke, or if you are in the company of smokers, and are to
wear your clothes in the presence of ladies afterwards, you must change
them to smoke in. A host who asks you to smoke, will generally offer you
an old coat for the purpose. You must also, after smoking, rinse the
mouth well out, and, if possible, brush the teeth. You should never
smoke in another person’s house without leave, and you should not ask
leave to do so if there are ladies in the house. When you are going to
smoke a cigar you should offer one at the same time to anybody present,
if not a clergyman or a very old man. You should always smoke a cigar
given to you, whether good or bad, and never make any remarks on its
quality.

“Smoking reminds me of spitting, but as this is at all times a
disgusting habit, I need say nothing more than--never indulge in it.
Besides being coarse and atrocious, it is very bad for the health.”

Chesterfield warns his son against faults in good breeding in the
following words, and these warnings will be equally applicable to the
student of etiquette in the present day. He says:--

“Of the lesser talents, good breeding is the principal and most
necessary one, not only as it is very important in itself, but as it
adds great lustre to the more solid advantages both of the heart and the
mind. I have often touched upon good breeding to you before; so that
this letter shall be upon the next necessary qualification to it, which
is a genteel and easy manner and carriage, wholly free from those odd
tricks, ill-habits, and awkwardnesses, which even many very worthy and
sensible people have in their behaviour. However trifling a genteel
manner may sound, it is of very great consequence towards pleasing in
private life, especially the women, which one time or other, you will
think worth pleasing; and I have known many a man from his awkwardness,
give people such a dislike of him at first, that all his merit could not
get the better of it afterwards. Whereas a genteel manner prepossesses
people in your favor, bends them towards you, and makes them wish to be
like you. Awkwardness can proceed but from two causes; either from not
having kept good company, or from not having attended to it. In good
company do you take care to observe their ways and manners, and to form
your own upon them. Attention is absolutely necessary for this, as,
indeed, it is for everything else; and a man without attention is not
fit to live in the world. When an awkward fellow first comes into a
room, it is highly probable that he goes and places himself in the very
place of the whole room where he should not; there he soon lets his hat
fall down, and, in taking it up again, throws down his cane; in
recovering his cane, his hat falls a second time, so that he is quarter
of an hour before he is in order again. If he drinks tea or coffee, he
certainly scalds his mouth, and lets either the cup or saucer fall, and
spills either the tea or coffee. At dinner his awkwardness distinguishes
itself particularly, as he has more to do; there he holds his knife,
fork, and spoon differently from other people, eats with his knife, to
the great danger of his mouth, picks his teeth with his fork, and puts
his spoon, which has been in his throat twenty times, into the dishes
again. If he is to carve, he can never hit the joint: but, in his vain
efforts to cut through the bone, scatters the sauce in everybody’s face.
He generally daubs himself with soup and grease, though his napkin is
commonly stuck through a button-hole, and tickles his chin. When he
drinks, he infallibly coughs in his glass, and besprinkles the company.
Besides all this, he has strange tricks and gestures; such as snuffing
up his nose, making faces, putting his finger in his nose, or blowing it
and looking afterwards in his handkerchief so as to make the company
sick. His hands are troublesome to him, when he has not something in
them, and he does not know where to put them; but they are in perpetual
motion between his bosom and his breeches; he does not wear his clothes,
and, in short, he does nothing like other people. All this, I own, is
not in any degree criminal; but it is highly disagreeable and ridiculous
in company, and ought most carefully to be avoided, by whoever desires
to please.

“From this account of what you should not do, you may easily judge what
you should do; and a due attention to the manners of people of fashion,
and who have seen the world, will make it habitual and familiar to you.

“There is, likewise, an awkwardness of expression and words, most
carefully to be avoided; such as false English, bad pronunciation, old
sayings, and common proverbs; which are so many proofs of having kept
bad and low company. For example, if, instead of saying that tastes are
different, and that every man has his own peculiar one, you should let
off a proverb, and say, That what is one man’s meat is another man’s
poison; or else, Every one as they like, as the good man said when he
kissed his cow; everybody would be persuaded that you had never kept
company with anybody above footmen and housemaids.

“Attention will do all this, and without attention nothing is to be
done; want of attention, which is really want of thought, is either
folly or madness. You should not only have attention to everything, but
a quickness of attention, so as to observe, at once, all the people in
the room, their motions, their looks, and their words, and yet without
staring at them, and seeming to be an observer. This quick and
unobserved observation is of infinite advantage in life, and is to be
acquired with care; and, on the contrary, what is called absence, which
is thoughtlessness, and want of attention about what is doing, makes a
man so like either a fool or a madman, that, for my part, I see no real
difference. A fool never has thought; a madman has lost it; and an
absent man is, for the time, without it.

“I would warn you against those disagreeable tricks and awkwardnesses,
which many people contract when they are young, by the negligence of
their parents, and cannot get quit of them when they are old; such as
odd motions, strange postures, and ungenteel carriage. But there is
likewise an awkwardness of the mind, that ought to be, and with care may
be, avoided; as, for instance, to mistake names; to speak of Mr.
What-d’ye-call-him, or Mrs. Thingum, or How-d’ye-call-her, is
excessively awkward and ordinary. To call people by improper titles and
appellations is so too. To begin a story or narration when you are not
perfect in it, and cannot go through with it, but are forced, possibly,
to say, in the middle of it, ‘I have forgotten the rest,’ is very
unpleasant and bungling. One must be extremely exact, clear, and
perspicuous, in everything one says, otherwise, instead of entertaining,
or informing others, one only tires and puzzles them. The voice and
manner of speaking, too, are not to be neglected; some people almost
shut their mouths when they speak, and mutter so, that they are not to
be understood; others speak so fast, and sputter, that they are not to
be understood neither; some always speak as loud as if they were talking
to deaf people; and others so low that one cannot hear them. All these
habits are awkward and disagreeable, and are to be avoided by attention;
they are the distinguishing marks of the ordinary people, who have had
no care taken of their education. You cannot imagine how necessary it is
to mind all these little things; for I have seen many people with great
talents ill-received, for want of having these talents, too; and others
well received, only from their little talents, and who have had no great
ones.”

Nothing is in worse taste in society than to repeat the witticisms or
remarks of another person as if they were your own. If you are
discovered in the larceny of another’s ideas, you may originate a
thousand brilliant ones afterwards, but you will not gain the credit of
one. If you quote your friend’s remarks, give them as quotations.

Be cautious in the use of your tongue. Wise men say, that a man may
repent when he has spoken, but he will not repent if he keeps silence.

If you wish to retain a good position in society, be careful to return
all the visits which are paid to you, promptly, and do not neglect your
calls upon ladies, invalids, and men older than yourself.

Visiting cards should be small, perfectly plain, with your name, and, if
you will, your address _engraved_ upon it. A handsomely written card is
the most elegant one for a gentleman, after that comes the engraved one;
a printed one is very seldom used, and is not at all elegant. Have no
fanciful devices, ornamented edges, or flourishes upon your visiting
cards, and never put your profession or business upon any but business
cards, unless it is as a prefix or title: as, Dr., Capt., Col., or Gen.,
in case you are in the army or navy, put U.S.N., or U.S.A. after your
name, but if you are only in the militia, avoid the vulgarity of using
your title, excepting when you are with your company or on a parade.
Tinted cards may be used, but plain white ones are much more elegant. If
you leave a card at a hotel or boarding house, write the name of the
person for whom it is intended above your own, on the card.

In directing a letter, put first the name of the person for whom it is
intended, then the name of the city, then that of the state in which he
resides. If you send it to the care of another person, or to a boarding
house, or hotel, you can put that name either after the name of your
correspondent, or in the left hand corner of the letter--thus:--

                              MR. J. S. JONES,
                                  Care of Mr. T. C. Jones,
                                                       Boston,
                                                            Mass.

or,

                                          MR. J. S. JONES,
                                                       Boston,
                                                            Mass.
     Revere House.

If your friend is in the army or navy, put his title before his station
after his name, thus:--

                                          CAPT. L. LEWIS, U.S.A.,

or,

                                    LIEUTENANT T. ROBERTS, U.S.N.

If you send your letter by a private hand, put the name of the bearer in
the lower left hand corner of the envelope, but put the name only.
“Politeness of,”--or “Kindness of,” are obsolete, and not used now at
all. Write the direction thus:--

                                     J. L. HOLMES, ESQ.,
                                              Revere House,
                                                       Boston,
                                                            Mass.

    C. L. Cutts, Esq.

This will let your friend, Mr. Holmes, know that Mr. Cutts is in Boston,
which is the object to be gained by putting the name of the bearer on a
letter, sent by a private hand.

GUARD AGAINST VULGAR LANGUAGE. There is as much connection between the
words and the thoughts as there is between the thoughts and the words;
the latter are not only the expression of the former, but they have a
power to re-act upon the soul and leave the stains of their corruption
there. A young man who allows himself to use one profane or vulgar word,
has not only shown that there is a foul spot on his mind, but by the
utterance of that word he extends that spot and inflames it, till, by
indulgence, it will soon pollute and ruin the whole soul. Be careful of
your words as well as your thoughts. If you can control the tongue, that
no improper words are pronounced by it, you will soon be able to control
the mind and save it from corruption. You extinguish the fire by
smothering it, or by preventing bad thoughts bursting out in language.
Never utter a word anywhere, which you would be ashamed to speak in the
presence of the most religious man. Try this practice a little, and you
will soon have command of yourself.

Do not be known as an egotist. No man is more dreaded in society, or
accounted a greater “bore” than he whose every other word is “I,” “me,”
or “my.” Show an interest in all that others say of themselves, but
speak but little of your own affairs.

It is quite as bad to be a mere relater of scandal or the affairs of
your neighbors. A female gossip is detestable, but a male gossip is not
only detestable but utterly despicable.

A celebrated English lawyer gives the following directions for young men
entering into business. He says:--

“SELECT THE KIND OF BUSINESS THAT SUITS YOUR NATURAL INCLINATIONS AND
TEMPERAMENT.--Some men are naturally mechanics; others have a strong
aversion to anything like machinery, and so on; one man has a natural
taste for one occupation in life, and another for another.

“I never could succeed as a merchant. I have tried it, unsuccessfully,
several times. I never could be content with a fixed salary, for mine is
a purely speculative disposition, while others are just the reverse; and
therefore all should be careful to select those occupations that suit
them best.

“LET YOUR PLEDGED WORD EVER BE SACRED.--Never promise to do a thing
without performing it with the most rigid promptness. Nothing is more
valuable to a man in business than the name of always doing as he
agrees, and that to the moment. A strict adherence to this rule gives a
man the command of half the spare funds within the range of his
acquaintance, and encircles him with a host of friends, who may be
depended upon in any emergency.

“WHATEVER YOU DO, DO WITH ALL YOUR MIGHT.--Work at it, if necessary,
early and late, in season and out of season, not leaving a stone
unturned, and never deferring for a single hour that which can just as
well be done _now_. The old proverb is full of truth and
meaning--“Whatever is worth doing at all, is worth doing well.” Many a
man acquires a fortune by doing his business _thoroughly_, while his
neighbor remains poor for life, because he only _half_ does his
business. Ambition, energy, industry, and perseverance, are
indispensable requisites for success in business.

“SOBRIETY. USE NO DESCRIPTION OF INTOXICATING DRINKS.--As no man can
succeed in business unless he has a _brain_ to enable him to lay his
plans, and _reason_ to guide him in their execution, so, no matter how
bountifully a man may be blessed with intelligence, if his brain is
muddled, and his judgment warped by intoxicating drinks, it is
impossible for him to carry on business successfully. How many good
opportunities have passed never to return, while a man was sipping a
‘social glass’ with a friend! How many a foolish bargain has been made
under the influence of the wine-cup, which temporarily makes his victim
so _rich_! How many important chances have been put off until to-morrow,
and thence for ever, because indulgence has thrown the system into a
state of lassitude, neutralizing the energies so essential to success in
business. The use of intoxicating drinks as a beverage is as much an
infatuation as is the smoking of opium by the Chinese, and the former is
quite as destructive to the success of the business man as the latter.

“LET HOPE PREDOMINATE, BUT BE NOT TOO VISIONARY.--Many persons are
always kept poor because they are too _visionary_. Every project looks
to them like certain success, and, therefore, they keep changing from
one business to another, always in hot water, and always ‘under the
harrow.’ The plan of ‘counting the chickens before they are hatched,’ is
an error of ancient date, but it does not seem to improve by age.

“DO NOT SCATTER YOUR POWERS.--Engage in one kind of business only, and
stick to it faithfully until you succeed, or until you conclude to
abandon it. A constant hammering on one nail will generally drive it
home at last, so that it can be clinched. When a man’s undivided
attention is centered on one object, his mind will continually be
suggesting improvements of value, which would escape him if his brain
were occupied by a dozen different subjects at once. Many a fortune has
slipped through men’s fingers by engaging in too many occupations at
once.

“ENGAGE PROPER EMPLOYEES.--Never employ a man of bad habits when one
whose habits are good can be found to fill his situation. I have
generally been extremely fortunate in having faithful and competent
persons to fill the responsible situations in my business; and a man can
scarcely be too grateful for such a blessing. When you find a man unfit
to fill his station, either from incapacity or peculiarity of character
or disposition, dispense with his services, and do not drag out a
miserable existence in the vain attempt to change his nature. It is
utterly impossible to do so, ‘You cannot make a silk purse,’ &c. He has
been created for some other sphere; let him find and fill it.”

If you wish to succeed in society, and be known as a man who converses
well, you must cultivate your memory. Do not smile and tell me that this
is a gift, not an acquirement. It is true that some people have
naturally a more retentive memory than others, but those naturally most
deficient may strengthen their powers by cultivation.

Cultivate, therefore, this glorious faculty, by storing and exercising
it with trains of imagery. Accustom yourselves to look at any natural
object, and then consider how many facts and thoughts may be associated
with it--how much of poetic imagery and refined combinations. Follow out
this idea, and you will find that imagination, which is too often in
youth permitted to build up castles in the air, tenantless as they are
unprofitable, will become, if duly exercised, a source of much
enjoyment. I was led into this train of thought while walking in a
beautiful country, and seeing before me a glorious rainbow, over-arching
the valley which lay in front. And not more quickly than its appearance,
came to my remembrance an admirable passage in the “Art of Poetic
Painting,” wherein the author suggests the great mental advantage of
exercising the mind on all subjects, by considering--

    “What use can be made of them?
    What remarks they will illustrate?
    What representations they will serve?
    What comparison they will furnish?”

And while thus thinking, I remembered that the ingenious author has
instanced the rainbow as affording a variety of illustrations, and
capable, in the imagery which it suggests, of numerous combinations.
Thus:


THE HUES OF THE RAINBOW

    Tinted the green and flowery banks of the stream;
    Tinged the white blossoms of the apple orchards;
    Shed a beauteous radiance on the grass;
    Veiled the waning moon and the evening star;
    Over-arched the mist of the waterfall;
    Reminded the looker-on of peace opposed to turbulence.
    And illustrated the moral that even the most beautiful things
      of earth must pass away.

Every book you read, every natural object which meets your view, may be
the exercise of memory, be made to furnish food both for reflection and
conversation, enjoyment for your own solitary hours, and the means of
making you popular in society. Believe me, the man who--“saw it, to be
sure, but really forgot what it looked like,” who is met every day in
society, will not be sought after as will the man, who, bringing memory
and fancy happily blended to bear upon what he sees, can make every
object worthy of remark familiar and interesting to those who have not
seen it.

If you have leisure moments, and what man has not? do not consider them
as spare atoms of time to be wasted, idled away in profitless lounging.
Always have a book within your reach, which you may catch up at your odd
minutes. Resolve to edge in a little reading every day, if it is but a
single sentence. If you can give fifteen minutes a day, it will be felt
at the end of the year. Thoughts take up no room. When they are right
they afford a portable pleasure, which one may travel or labor with
without any trouble or incumbrance.

In your intercourse with other men, let every word that falls from your
lips, bear the stamp of perfect truth. No reputation can be more
enviable than that of being known as a man who no consideration could
force to soil his soul with a lie.

“Truth is naturally so acceptable to man, so charming in herself, that
to make falsehood be received, we are compelled to dress it up in the
snow-white robes of Truth; as in passing base coin, it must have the
impress of the good ere it will pass current. Deception, hypocrisy, and
dissimulation, are, when practised, direct compliments to the power of
Truth; and the common custom of passing off Truth’s counterfeit for
herself, is strong testimony in behalf of her intrinsic beauty and
excellence.”

Next to being a man of talent, a well-read man is the most agreeable in
society, and no investment of money or time is so profitable as that
spent in good, useful books, and reading. A good book is a lasting
companion. Truths, which it has taken years to glean, are therein at
once freely but carefully communicated. We enjoy communion with the
mind, though not with the person of the writer. Thus the humblest man
may surround himself by the wisest and best spirits of past and present
ages. No one can be solitary who possesses a book; he owns a friend that
will instruct him in moments of leisure or of necessity. It is only
necessary to turn open the leaves, and the fountain at once gives forth
its streams. You may seek costly furniture for your homes, fanciful
ornaments for your mantel-pieces, and rich carpets for your floors; but,
after the absolute necessaries for a home, give me books as at once the
cheapest, and certainly the most useful and abiding embellishments.

A true gentleman will not only refrain from ridiculing the follies,
ignorance, or infirmities of others, but he will not even allow himself
to smile at them. He will treat the rudest clown with the same easy
courtesy which he would extend to the most polished gentleman, and will
never by word, look, or gesture show that he notices the faults, or
vulgarity of another. _Personal deformity_ is a cross sent by God, and
none but a depraved, wicked, and brutal man could ridicule, or even
greet with a passing smile the unfortunate thus stamped. Even a word or
look of pity will wound the sensitive, but frank, gentle courtesy, the
regard paid by a feeling man to the comfort of a cripple, or that easy
grace which, while it shows no sign of seeing the deformity, shows more
deference to the afflicted one than to the more fortunate, are all duly
appreciated and acknowledged, and win for the man who extends them the
respect and love of all with whom he comes in contact.

Remember that true wit never descends to personalities. When you hear a
man trying to be “funny” at the expense of his friends, or even his
enemies, you may feel sure that his _humor_ is forced, and while it
sinks to ill-nature, cannot rise to the level of true _wit_.

Never try to make yourself out to be a very important person. If you are
so really, your friends will soon find it out, if not, they will not
give you credit for being so, because you try to force your fancied
importance upon them. A pompous fool, though often seen, is not much
loved nor respected, and you may remember that the frog who tried to
make himself as big as an ox, died in the attempt.

A severe wit once said, “If you do not wish to be the mark for
slanderous tongues, be the first to enter a room, and the last to leave
it.”

If you are ever tempted to speak against a woman, think first--“Suppose
she were my sister!” You can never gain anything by bringing your voice
against a woman, even though she may deserve contempt, and your
forbearance may shame others into a similar silence. It is a cowardly
tongue that will take a woman’s name upon it to injure her; though many
men do this, who would fear,--_absolutely be afraid_, to speak against a
man, or that same woman, had she a manly arm to protect her.

I again quote from the celebrated Lord Chesterfield, who says:

“It is good-breeding alone that can prepossess people in your favour at
first sight, more time being necessary to discover greater talents. This
good-breeding, you know, does not consist in low bows and formal
ceremony; but in an easy, civil, and respectful behaviour. You will take
care, therefore, to answer with complaisance, when you are spoken to; to
place yourself at the lower end of the table, unless bid to go higher;
to drink first to the lady of the house, and next to the master; not to
eat awkwardly or dirtily; not to sit when others stand; and to do all
this with an air of complaisance, and not with a grave, sour look, as if
you did it all unwillingly. I do not mean a silly, insipid smile, that
fools have when they would be civil; but an air of sensible good-humor.
I hardly know anything so difficult to attain, or so necessary to
possess, as perfect good-breeding; which is equally inconsistent with a
still formality, and impertinent forwardness, and an awkward
bashfulness. A little ceremony is often necessary; a certain degree of
firmness is absolutely so; and an outward modesty is extremely becoming;
the knowledge of the world, and your own observations, must, and alone
can tell you the proper quantities of each.

“I mentioned the general rules of common civility, which, whoever does
not observe, will pass for a bear, and be as unwelcome as one, in
company; there is hardly any body brutal enough not to answer when they
are spoken to. But it is not enough not to be rude; you should be
extremely civil, and distinguished for your good breeding. The first
principle of this good breeding is never to say anything that you think
can be disagreeable to any body in company; but, on the contrary, you
should endeavor to say what will be agreeable to them; and that in an
easy and natural manner, without seeming to study for compliments. There
is likewise such a thing as a civil look, and a rude look; and you
should look civil, as well as be so; for if, while you are saying a
civil thing, you look gruff and surly, as English bumpkins do, nobody
will be obliged to you for a civility that seemed to come so
unwillingly. If you have occasion to contradict any body, or to set them
right from a mistake, it would be very brutal to say, ‘_That is not so,
I know better_, or _You are out_; but you should say with a civil look,
_I beg your pardon, I believe you mistake_, or, _If I may take the
liberty of contradicting you, I believe it is so and so_; for, though
you may know a thing better than other people, yet it is very shocking
to tell them so directly, without something to soften it; but remember
particularly, that whatever you say or do, with ever so civil an
intention, a great deal consists in the manner and the look, which must
be genteel, easy, and natural, and is easier to be felt than described.

“Civility is particularly due to all women; and remember, that no
provocation whatsoever can justify any man in not being civil to every
woman; and the greatest man would justly be reckoned a brute, if he were
not civil to the meanest woman. It is due to their sex, and is the only
protection they have against the superior strength of ours; nay, even a
little flattery is allowable with women; and a man may, without
meanness, tell a woman that she is either handsomer or wiser than she
is. Observe the French people, and mind how easily and naturally civil
their address is, and how agreeably they insinuate little civilities in
their conversation. They think it so essential, that they call an honest
man and a civil man by the same name, of _honnête homme_; and the Romans
called civility _humanitas_, as thinking it inseparable from humanity.
You cannot begin too early to take that turn, in order to make it
natural and habitual to you.”

Again, speaking of the inconveniency of bashfulness, he says:--

“As for the _mauvaise honte_, I hope you are above it. Your figure is
like other people’s; I suppose you will care that your dress shall be so
too, and to avoid any singularity. What then should you be ashamed of?
and why not go into a mixed company, with as much ease and as little
concern, as you would go into your own room? Vice and ignorance are the
only things I know, which one ought to be ashamed of; keep but clear of
them, and you may go anywhere without fear or concern. I have known some
people, who, from feeling the pain and inconveniences of this _mauvaise
honte_, have rushed into the other extreme, and turned impudent, as
cowards sometimes grow desperate from the excess of danger; but this too
is carefully to be avoided, there being nothing more generally shocking
than impudence. The medium between these two extremes marks out the
well-bred man; he feels himself firm and easy in all companies; is
modest without being bashful, and steady without being impudent; if he
is a stranger, he observes, with care, the manners and ways of the
people most esteemed at that place, and conforms to them with
complaisance.”

Flattery is always in bad taste. If you say more in a person’s praise
than is deserved, you not only say what is _false_, but you make others
doubt the wisdom of your judgment. Open, palpable flattery will be
regarded by those to whom it is addressed as an insult. In your
intercourse with ladies, you will find that the delicate compliment of
seeking their society, showing your pleasure in it, and choosing for
subjects of conversation, other themes than the weather, dress, or the
opera, will be more appreciated by women of sense, than the more awkward
compliment of open words or gestures of admiration.

Never imitate the eccentricities of other men, even though those men
have the highest genius to excuse their oddities. Eccentricity is, at
the best, in bad taste; but an imitation of it--second hand oddity--is
detestable.

Never feign abstraction in society. If you have matters of importance
which really occupy your mind, and prevent you from paying attention to
the proper etiquette of society, stay at home till your mind is less
preoccupied. Chesterfield says:--

“What is commonly called an absent man, is commonly either a very weak,
or a very affected man; but be he which he will, he is, I am sure, a
very disagreeable man in company. He fails in all the common offices of
civility; he seems not to know those people to-day, whom yesterday he
appeared to live in intimacy with. He takes no part in the general
conversation; but, on the contrary, breaks into it from time to time,
with some start of his own, as if he waked from a dream. This (as I said
before) is a sure indication, either of a mind so weak that it is not
able to bear above one object at a time; or so affected, that it would
be supposed to be wholly engrossed by, and directed to, some very great
and important objects. Sir Isaac Newton, Mr. Locke, and (it may be) five
or six more, since the creation of the world, may have had a right to
absence, from that intense thought which the things they were
investigating required. But if a young man, and a man of the world, who
has no such avocations to plead, will claim and exercise that right of
absence in company, his pretended right should, in my mind, be turned
into an involuntary absence, by his perpetual exclusion out of company.
However frivolous a company may be, still, while you are among them, do
not show them, by your inattention, that you think them so; but rather
take their tone, and conform, in some degree, to their weakness, instead
of manifesting your contempt for them. There is nothing that people
bear more impatiently, or forgive less, than contempt; and an injury is
much sooner forgotten than an insult. If, therefore, you would rather
please than offend, rather be well than ill-spoken of, rather be loved
than hated; remember to have that constant attention about you, which
flatters every man’s little vanity; and the want of which, by mortifying
his pride, never fails to excite his resentment, or, at least, his ill
will. For instance: most people (I might say all people) have their
weaknesses; they have their aversions and their likings to such or such
things; so that, if you were to laugh at a man for his aversion to a
cat, or cheese, (which are common antipathies,) or, by inattention and
negligence, to let them come in his way, where you could prevent it, he
would, in the first case, think himself insulted, and, in the second,
slighted, and would remember both. Whereas your care to procure for him
what he likes, and to remove from him what he hates, shows him that he
is, at least, an object of your attention; flatters his vanity, and
makes him, possibly, more your friend than a more important service
would have done. With regard to women, attentions still below these are
necessary, and, by the custom of the world, in some measure due,
according to the laws of good breeding.”

In giving an entertainment to your friends, while you avoid extravagant
expenditure, it is your duty to place before them the best your purse
will permit you to purchase, and be sure you have plenty. Abundance
without superfluity, and good quality without extravagance, are your
best rules for an entertainment.

If, by the introduction of a friend, by a mistake, or in any other way,
your enemy, or a man to whom you have the strongest personal dislike, is
under your roof, or at your table, as a guest, hospitality and good
breeding both require you to treat him with the same frank courtesy
which you extend to your other guests; though you need make no violent
protestations of friendship, and are not required to make any advances
towards him after he ceases to be your guest.

In giving a dinner party, invite only as many guests as you can seat
comfortably at your table. If you have two tables, have them precisely
alike, or, rest assured, you will offend those friends whom you place at
what they judge to be the inferior table. Above all, avoid having little
tables placed in the corners of the room, when there is a large table.
At some houses in Paris it is a fashion to set the dining room entirely
with small tables, which will accommodate comfortably three or four
people, and such parties are very merry, very sociable and pleasant, if
four congenial people are around each table; but it is a very dull
fashion, if you are not sure of the congeniality of each quartette of
guests.

If you lose your fortune or position in society, it is wiser to retire
from the world of fashion than to wait for that world to bow you out.

If you are poor, but welcome in society on account of your family or
talents, avoid the error which the young are most apt to fall into, that
of living beyond your means.

The advice of Polonius to Laertes is as excellent in the present day, as
it was in Shakespeare’s time:--

                  “Give thy thoughts no tongue,
    Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
    Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
    The friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
    Grapple them to thy soul with hooks of steel:
    But do not dull thy palm with entertainments
    Of each new hatch’d, unfledg’d comrade. Beware
    Of entrance to a quarrel: but, being in,
    Bear it that the opposer may beware of thee.
    Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice;
    Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment.
    Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
    But not express’d in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
    For the apparel oft proclaims the man.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Neither a borrower nor a lender be:
    For loan oft loses both itself and friend;
    And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
    This above all,--To thine ownself be true;
    And it must follow, as the night the day,
    Thou canst not then be false to any man.”

It is by no means desirable to be always engaged in the serious pursuits
of life. Take time for pleasure, and you will find your work progresses
faster for some recreation. Lord Chesterfield says:

“I do not regret the time that I passed in pleasures; they were
seasonable; they were the pleasures of youth, and I enjoyed them while
young. If I had not, I should probably have overvalued them now, as we
are very apt to do what we do not know; but knowing them as I do, I know
their real value, and how much they are generally overrated. Nor do I
regret the time that I have passed in business, for the same reason;
those who see only the outside of it, imagine it has hidden charms,
which they pant after; and nothing but acquaintance can undeceive them.
I, who have been behind the scenes, both of pleasure and business, and
have seen all the springs and pullies of those decorations which
astonish and dazzle the audience, retire, not only without regret, but
with contentment and satisfaction. But what I do, and ever shall regret,
is the time which, while young, I lost in mere idleness, and in doing
nothing. This is the common effect of the inconsideracy of youth,
against which I beg you will be most carefully upon your guard. The
value of moments, when cast up, is immense, if well employed; if thrown
away, their loss is irrecoverable. Every moment may be put to some use,
and that with much more pleasure than if unemployed. Do not imagine that
by the employment of time, I mean an uninterrupted application to
serious studies. No; pleasures are, at proper times, both as necessary
and as useful; they fashion and form you for the world; they teach you
characters, and show you the human heart in its unguarded minutes. But
then remember to make that use of them. I have known many people, from
laziness of mind, go through both pleasure and business with equal
inattention; neither enjoying the one nor doing the other; thinking
themselves men of pleasure, because they were mingled with those who
were, and men of business, because they had business to do, though they
did not do it. Whatever you do, do it to the purpose; do it thoroughly,
not superficially. _Approfondissez_: go to the bottom of things.
Anything half done or half known, is, in my mind, neither done nor
known at all. Nay worse, it often misleads. There is hardly any place or
any company where you may not gain knowledge, if you please; almost
every body knows some one thing, and is glad to talk upon that one
thing. Seek and you will find, in this world as well as in the next. See
everything; inquire into everything; and you may excuse your curiosity,
and the questions you ask, which otherwise might be thought impertinent,
by your manner of asking them; for most things depend a great deal upon
the manner. As, for example, I _am afraid that I am very troublesome
with my questions; but nobody can inform me so well as you_; or
something of that kind.”

The same author, speaking of the evils of pedantry, says:--

“Every excellency, and every virtue has its kindred vice or weakness;
and, if carried beyond certain bounds, sinks into one or the other.
Generosity often runs into profusion, economy into avarice, courage into
rashness, caution into timidity, and so on:--insomuch that, I believe,
there is more judgment required for the proper conduct of our virtues,
than for avoiding their opposite vices. Vice, in its true light, is so
deformed, that it shocks us at first sight, and would hardly ever seduce
us, if it did not at first wear the mask of some virtue. But virtue is,
in itself, so beautiful, that it charms us at first sight; engages us
more and more upon further acquaintance; and, as with other beauties, we
think excess impossible, it is here that judgment is necessary, to
moderate and direct the effects of an excellent cause. I shall apply
this reasoning, at present, not to any particular virtue, but to an
excellency, which, for want of judgment, is often the cause of
ridiculous and blameable effects; I mean great learning; which, if not
accompanied with sound judgment, frequently carries us into error,
pride, and pedantry. As, I hope, you will possess that excellency in its
utmost extent, and yet without its too common failings, the hints, which
my experience can suggest, may probably not be useless to you.

“Some learned men, proud of their knowledge, only speak to decide, and
give judgment without appeal; the consequence of which is, that mankind,
provoked by the insult, and injured by the oppression, revolt; and, in
order to shake off the tyranny, even call the lawful authority in
question. The more you know, the modester you should be; and (by the
bye) that modesty is the surest way of gratifying your vanity. Even
where you are sure, seem rather doubtful; represent, but do not
pronounce; and, if you would convince others, seem open to conviction
yourself.

“Others, to show their learning, or often from the prejudices of a
school education, where they hear of nothing else, are always talking of
the ancients, as something more than men, and of the moderns, as
something less. They are never without a classic or two in their
pockets; they stick to the old good sense; they read none of the modern
trash; and will show you plainly that no improvement has been made in
any one art or science these last seventeen hundred years. I would, by
no means, have you disown your acquaintance with the ancients; but still
less would I have you brag of an exclusive intimacy with them. Speak of
the moderns without contempt, and of the ancients without idolatry;
judge them all by their merits, but not by their ages; and if you happen
to have an Elzevir classic in your pocket, neither show it nor mention
it.

“Some great scholars, most absurdly, draw all their maxims, both for
public and private life, from what they call parallel cases in the
ancient authors; without considering that, in the first place, there
never were, since the creation of the world, two cases exactly parallel;
and, in the next place, that there never was a case stated, or even
known, by any historian, with every one of its circumstances; which,
however, ought to be known in order to be reasoned from. Reason upon the
case itself, and the several circumstances that attend it, and act
accordingly; but not from the authority of ancient poets or historians.
Take into your consideration, if you please, cases seemingly analogous;
but take them as helps only, not as guides.

“There is another species of learned men who, though less dogmatical and
supercilious, are not less impertinent. These are the communicative and
shining pedants, who adorn their conversation, even with women, by happy
quotations of Greek and Latin; and who have contracted such a
familiarity with the Greek and Roman authors, that they call them by
certain names or epithets denoting intimacy. As, _old_ Homer; that _sly
rogue_ Horace; _Maro_, instead of Virgil; and _Naso_, instead of Ovid.
These are often imitated by coxcombs who have no learning at all, but
who have got some names and some scraps of ancient authors by heart,
which they improperly and impertinently retail in all companies, in
hopes of passing for scholars. If, therefore, you would avoid the
accusation of pedantry on one hand, or the suspicion of ignorance on the
other, abstain from learned ostentation. Speak the language of the
company that you are in; speak it purely, and unlarded with any other.
Never seem wiser nor more learned than the people you are with. Wear
your learning, like your watch, in a private pocket; and do not pull it
out and strike it, merely to show that you have one. If you are asked
what o’clock it is, tell it, but do not proclaim it hourly and unasked,
like the watchman.

“Upon the whole, remember that learning (I mean Greek and Roman
learning) is a most useful and necessary ornament, which it is shameful
not to be master of; but, at the same time, most carefully avoid those
errors and abuses which I have mentioned, and which too often attend it.
Remember, too, that great modern knowledge is still more necessary than
ancient; and that you had better know perfectly the present, than the
old state of the world; though I would have you well acquainted with
both.”

If you are poor, you must deprive yourself often of the pleasure of
escorting ladies to ride, the opera, or other entertainments, because it
is understood in society that, in these cases, a gentleman pays all the
expenses for both, and in any emergency you may find your bill for
carriage hire, suppers, bouquets, or other unforeseen demands, greater
than you anticipated.

Shun the card table. Even the friendly games common in society, for
small stakes, are best avoided. They feed the love of gambling, and you
will find that this love, if once acquired, is the hardest curse to get
rid of.

It is in bad taste, though often done, to turn over the cards on a
table, when you are calling. If your host or hostess finds you so doing,
it may lead them to suppose you value them more for their acquaintances
than themselves.




----------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcriber’s Note:


Inconsistencies in accents (e.g. tete a tete vs. tête à tête) and
hyphenation (e.g. ball room vs. ball-room) have not been corrected.
Variant spellings have also been retained.

Minor typographical errors (e.g. missing punctuation, incorrect or
duplicate letters) have been corrected without note.

The following changes were also made to the text:

p. 130: missing ‘at’ added (too lazy to part it at all)

p. 255: two asterisks changed to ellipsis (before he begins any
other....)

p. 266: italics added to ‘I’ and removed from ‘or’ ( _I have the honor
to acquaint you_; _Permit me to assure you_; or,)

p. 292: italics removed from ‘of’ (_largesse_ of)

p. 332: off to of (get rid of)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gentlemen's Book of Etiquette and
Manual of Politeness, by Cecil B. Hartley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOOK OF ETIQUETTE ***

***** This file should be named 39293-0.txt or 39293-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/9/39293/

Produced by Julia Miller, S.D., and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great House, by Stanley J. Weyman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Great House

Author: Stanley J. Weyman

Release Date: March 28, 2012 [EBook #39294]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT HOUSE ***




Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (University of Michigan)











Transcriber's Notes:

   1. Page scan source:
      http://www.archive.org/details/greathouseastor00weymgoog
      (University of Michigan)

   2. The diphthong oe is represented by [oe].






                           THE GREAT HOUSE






                          BY THE SAME AUTHOR

       THE HOUSE OF THE WOLF
       THE NEW RECTOR
       THE STORY OF FRANCIS CLUDDE
       A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE
       THE MAN IN BLACK
       UNDER THE RED ROBE
       MY LADY ROTHA
       MEMOIRS OF A MINISTER OF FRANCE
       THE RED COCKADE
       SHREWSBURY
       THE CASTLE INN
       SOPHIA
       COUNT HANNIBAL
       IN KINGS' BYWAYS
       THE LONG NIGHT
       THE ABBESS OF VLAYE
       STARVECROW FARM
       CHIPPINGE
       LAID UP IN LAVENDER
       THE WILD GEESE






                           THE GREAT HOUSE




                                  BY

                          STANLEY J. WEYMAN

               Author of "The Castle Inn," "Chippinge,"
                 "A Gentleman of France," etc., etc.





                               NEW YORK
                       LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.
                    FOURTH AVENUE AND 30th STREET
                                 1919






                           Copyright, 1919
                                  BY
                          STANLEY J. WEYMAN






                               CONTENTS


   CHAPTER

         I. The Hôtel Lambert--Upstairs.

        II. The Hôtel Lambert--Downstairs.

       III. The Lawyer Abroad.

        IV. Homeward Bound.

         V. The London Packet.

        VI. Field and Forge.

       VII. Mr. John Audley.

      VIII. The Gatehouse.

        IX. Old Things.

         X. New Things.

        XI. Tact and Temper.

       XII. The Yew Walk.

      XIII. Peter Pauper.

       XIV. The Manchester Men.

        XV. Strange Bedfellows.

       XVI. The Great House at Beaudelays.

      XVII. To the Rescue.

     XVIII. Masks and Faces.

       XIX. The Corn Law Crisis.

        XX. Peter's Return.

       XXI. Toft at the Butterflies.

      XXII. My Lord Speaks.

     XXIII. Blore Under Weaver.

      XXIV. An Agent of the Old School.

       XXV. Mary is Lonely.

      XXVI. Missing.

     XXVII. A Footstep in the Hall.

    XXVIII. The News from Riddsley.

      XXIX. The Audley Bible.

       XXX. A Friend in Need.

      XXXI. Ben Bosham.

     XXXII. Mary Makes a Discovery.

    XXXIII. The Meeting at the Maypole.

     XXXIV. By the Canal.

      XXXV. My Lord Speaks Out.

     XXXVI. The Riddsley Election.

    XXXVII. A Turn of the Wheel.

   XXXVIII. Toft's Little Surprise.

     XXXIX. The Deed of Renunciation.

        XL. "Let Us Make Others Thankful."






                           THE GREAT HOUSE




                              CHAPTER I

                     THE HÔTEL LAMBERT--UPSTAIRS


On an evening in March in the 'forties of last century a girl looked
down on the Seine from an attic window on the Ile St. Louis. The
room behind her--or beside her, for she sat on the window-ledge, with
her back against one side of the opening and her feet against the
other--was long, whitewashed from floor to ceiling, lighted by five
gaunt windows, and as cold to the eye as charity to the recipient.
Along each side of the chamber ran ten pallet beds. A black door broke
the wall at one end, and above the door hung a crucifix. A painting of
a Station of the Cross adorned the wall at the other end. Beyond this
picture the room had no ornament; it is almost true to say that beyond
what has been named it had no furniture. One bed--the bed beside the
window at which the girl sat--was screened by a thin curtain which did
not reach the floor. This was her bed.

But in early spring no window in Paris looked on a scene more cheerful
than this window; which as from an eyrie commanded a shining reach of
the Seine bordered by the lawns and foliage of the King's Garden, and
closed by the graceful arches of the Bridge of Austerlitz. On the
water boats shot to and fro. The quays were gay with the red trousers
of soldiers and the coquettish caps of soubrettes, with students in
strange cloaks, and the twin kling wheels of yellow cabriolets. The
first swallows were hawking hither and thither above the water, and a
pleasant hum rose from the Boulevard Bourdon.

Yet the girl sighed. For it was her birthday, she was twenty this
twenty-fifth of March, and there was not a soul in the world to know
this and to wish her joy. A life of dependence, toned to the key of
the whitewashed room and the thin pallets, lay before her; and though
she had good reason to be thankful for the safety which dependence
bought, still she was only twenty, and springtime, viewed from prison
windows, beckons to its cousin, youth. She saw family groups walking
the quays, and father, mother, children, all, seen from a distance,
were happy. She saw lovers loitering in the garden or pacing to and
fro, and romance walked with every one of them; none came late, or
fell to words. She sighed more deeply; and on the sound the door
opened.

"_Hola!_" cried a shrill voice, speaking in French, fluent, but oddly
accented. "Who is here? The Princess desires that the English
Mademoiselle will descend this evening."

"Very good," the girl in the window replied pleasantly. "At the same
hour, Joséphine?"

"Why not, Mademoiselle?" A trim maid, with a plain face and the
faultless figure of a Pole, came a few steps into the room. "But you
are alone?"

"The children are walking. I stayed at home."

"To be alone? As if I did not understand that! To be alone--it is the
luxury of the rich."

The girl nodded. "None but a Pole would have thought of that," she
said.

"Ah, the crafty English Miss!" the maid retorted. "How she flatters!
Perhaps she needs a touch of the tongs to-night? Or the loan of a pair
of red-heeled shoes, worn no more than thrice by the Princess--and
with the black which is convenable for Mademoiselle, oh, so neat! Of
the _ancien régime_, absolutely!"

The other laughed. "The _ancien régime_, Joséphine--and this!" she
replied, with a gesture that embraced the room, the pallets, her own
bed. "A curled head--and this! You are truly a cabbage----"

"But Mademoiselle descends!"

"A cabbage of--foolishness!"

"Ah, well, if I descended, you would see," the maid retorted. "I am
but the Princess's second maid, and I know nothing! But if I descended
it would not be to this dormitory I should return! Nor to the
tartines! Nor to the daughters of Poland! Trust me for that--and I
know but my prayers. While Mademoiselle, she is an artist's daughter."

"There spoke the Pole again," the girl struck in with a smile.

"The English Miss knows how to flatter," Joséphine laughed. "That is
one for the touch of the tongs," she continued, ticking them off on
her fingers. "And one for the red-heeled shoes. And--but no more! Let
me begone before I am bankrupt!" She turned about with a flirt of her
short petticoats, but paused and looked back, with her hand on the
door. "None the less, mark you well, Mademoiselle, from the whitewash
to the ceiling of Lebrun, from the dortoir of the Jeunes Filles to the
Gallery of Hercules, there are but twenty stairs, and easy, oh, so
easy to descend! If Mademoiselle instead of flattering Joséphine, the
Cracovienne, flattered some pretty gentleman--who knows? Not I! I know
but my prayers!" And with a light laugh the maid clapped to the door
and was gone.

The girl in the window had not throughout the parley changed her pose
or moved more than her head, and this was characteristic of her. For
even in her playfulness there was gravity, and a measure of stillness.
Now, left alone, she dropped her feet to the floor, turned, and knelt
on the sill with her brow pressed against the glass. The sun had set,
mists were rising from the river, the quays were gray and cold. Here
and there a lamp began to shine through the twilight. But the girl's
thoughts were no longer on the scene beneath her eyes.

"There goes the third who has been good to me," she pondered. "First
the Polish lodger who lived on the floor below, and saved me from that
woman. Then the Princess's daughter. Now Joséphine. There are still
kind people in the world--God grant that I may not forget it! But how
much better to give than to take, to be strong than to be weak, to be
the mistress and not the puppet of fortune! How much better--and, were
I a man, how easy!"

But on that there came into her remembrance one to whom it had not
been easy, one who had signally failed to master fortune, or to
grapple with circumstances. "Poor father!" she whispered.




                              CHAPTER II

                    THE HÔTEL LAMBERT--DOWNSTAIRS


When ladies were at home to their intimates in the Paris of the
'forties, they seated their guests about large round tables with a
view to that common exchange of wit and fancy which is the French
ideal. The mode crossed to England, and in many houses these round
tables, fallen to the uses of the dining-room or the nursery, may
still be seen. But when the Princess Czartoriski entertained in the
Hôtel Lambert, under the ceiling painted by Lebrun, which had looked
down on the arm-chair of Madame de Châtelet and the tabouret of
Voltaire, she was, as became a Pole, a law to herself. In that
beautiful room, softly lit by wax candles, her guests were free to
follow their bent, to fall into groups, or to admire at their ease the
Watteaus and Bouchers which the Princess's father-in-law, old Prince
Adam, had restored to their native panels.

Thanks to his taste and under her rule the gallery of Hercules
presented on this evening a scene not unworthy of its past. The
silks and satins of the old régime were indeed replaced by the
high-shouldered coats, the stocks, the pins and velvet vests of the
dandies; and Thiers beaming through his glasses, or Lamartine, though
beauty, melted by the woes of Poland, hung upon his lips, might have
been thought by some unequal to the dead. But they were now what those
had been; and the women peacocked it as of old. At any rate the effect
was good, and a guest who came late, and paused a moment on the
threshold to observe the scene, thought that he had never before done
the room full justice. Presently the Princess saw him and he went
forward. The man who was talking to her made his bow, and she pointed
with her fan to the vacant place. "Felicitations, my lord," she said.
She held out her gloved hand.

"A thousands thanks," he said, as he bent over it. "But on what,
Princess?"

"On the success of a friend. On what we have all seen in the
_Journal_. Is it not true that you have won your suit?"

"I won, yes." He shrugged his shoulders. "But what, Madame? A bare
title, an empty rent-roll."

"For shame!" she answered. "But I suppose that this is your English
phlegm. Is it not a thing to be proud of--an old title? That which
money cannot buy and the wisest would fain wear? M. Guizot, what would
he not give to be Chien de Race? Your Peel, also?"

"And your Thiers?" he returned, with a sly glance at the little man in
the shining glasses.

"He, too! But he has the passion of humanity, which is a title in
itself. Whereas you English, turning in your unending circle, one out,
one in, one in, one out, are but playing a game--marking time! You
have not a desire to go forward!"

"Surely, Princess, you forget our Reform Bill, scarce ten years old."

"Which bought off your cotton lords and your fat bourgeois, and left
the people without leaders and more helpless than before. No, my lord,
if your Russell--Lord John, do you call him?--had one jot of M.
Thiers' enthusiasm! Or your Peel--but I look for nothing there!"

He shrugged his shoulders. "I admit," he said, "that M. Thiers has an
enthusiasm beyond the ordinary."

"You do? Wonderful!"

"But," with a smile, "it is, I fancy, an enthusiasm of which the
object is--M. Thiers!"

"Ah!" she cried, fanning herself more quickly. "Now there spoke not
Mr. Audley, the attaché--he had not been so imprudent! But--how do you
call yourself now?"

"On days of ceremony," he replied, "Lord Audley of Beaudelays."

"There spoke my lord, unattached! Oh, you English, you have no
enthusiasm. You have only traditions. Poor were Poland if her fate
hung on you!"

"There are still bright spots," he said slyly. And his glance returned
to the little statesman in spectacles on whom the Princess rested the
hopes of Poland.

"No!" she cried vividly. "Don't say it again or I shall be displeased.
Turn your eyes elsewhere. There is one here about whom I wish to
consult you. Do you see the tall girl in black who is engaged with the
miniatures?"

"I saw her some time ago."

"I suppose so. You are a man. I dare say you would call her handsome?"

"I think it possible, were she not in this company. What of her,
Princess?"

"Do you notice anything beyond her looks?"

"The picture is plain--for the frame in which I see her. Is she one of
the staff of your school?"

"Yes, but with an air----"

"Certainly--an air!" He nodded.

"Well, she is a countrywoman of yours and has a history. Her father, a
journalist, artist, no matter what, came to live in Paris years ago.
He went down, down, always down; six months ago he died. There was
enough to bury him, no more. She says, I don't know"--the Princess
indicated doubt with a movement of her fan--"that she wrote to friends
in England. Perhaps she did not write; how do I know? She was at the
last sou, the street before her, a hag of a concierge behind, and
withal--as you see her."

"Not wearing that dress, I presume?" he said with a faint smile.

"No. She had passed everything to the Mont de Piété; she had what she
stood up in--yet herself! Then a Polish family on the floor below, to
whom my daughter carried alms, told Cécile of her. They pitied her,
spoke well of her, she had done--no matter what for them--perhaps
nothing. Probably nothing. But Cécile ascended, saw her, became
enamoured, _enragée!_ You know Cécile--for her all that wears feathers
is of the angels! Nothing would do but she must bring her here and set
her to teach English to the daughters during her own absence."

"The Princess is away?"

"For four weeks. But in three days she returns, and you see where I
am. How do I know who this is? She may be this, or that. If she were
French, if she were Polish, I should know! But she is English and of a
calm, a reticence--ah!"

"And of a pride too," he replied thoughtfully, "if I mistake not. Yet
it is a good face, Princess."

She fluttered her fan. "It is a handsome one. For a man that is the
same."

"With all this you permit her to appear?"

"To be of use. And a little that she may be seen by some English
friend, who may tell me."

"Shall I talk to her?"

"If you will be so good. Learn, if you please, what she is."

"Your wishes are law," he rejoined. "Will you present me?"

"It is not necessary," the Princess answered. She beckoned to a stout
gentleman who wore whiskers trimmed à la mode du Roi, and had laurel
leaves on his coat collar. "A thousand thanks."

He lingered a moment to take part in the Princess's reception of the
Academician. Then he joined a group about old Prince Adam Czartoriski,
who was describing a recent visit to Cracow, that last morsel of free
Poland, soon to pass into the maw of Austria. A little apart, the girl
in black bent over the case of miniatures, comparing some with a list,
and polishing others with a square of silk. Presently he found himself
beside her. Their eyes met.

"I am told," he said, bowing, "that you are my countrywoman. The
Princess thought that I might be of use to you."

The girl had read his errand before he spoke and a shade flitted
across her face. She knew, only too well, that her hold on this rock
of safety to which chance had lifted her--out of a gulf of peril and
misery of which she trembled to think--was of the slightest. Early,
almost from the first, she had discovered that the Princess's
benevolence found vent rather in schemes for the good of many than in
tenderness for one. But hitherto she had relied on the daughter's
affection, and a little on her own usefulness. Then, too, she was
young and hopeful, and the depths from which she had escaped were such
that she could not believe that Providence would return her to them.

But she was quick-witted, and his opening frightened her. She guessed
at once that she was not to be allowed to await Cécile's return, that
her fate hung on what this Englishman, so big and bland and forceful,
reported of her.

She braced herself to meet the danger. "I am obliged to the Princess,"
she said. "But my ties with England are slight. I came to France with
my father when I was ten years old."

"I think you lost him recently?" He found his task less easy than it
should have been.

"He died six months ago," she replied, regarding him gravely. "His
illness left me without means. I was penniless, when the young
Princess befriended me and gave me a respite here. I am no part of
this," with a glance at the salon and the groups about them. "I teach
upstairs. I am thankful for the privilege of doing so."

"The Princess told me as much," he said frankly. "She thought that,
being English, I might advise you better than she could; that possibly
I might put you in touch with your relations?"

She shook her head.

"Or your friends? You must have friends?"

"Doubtless my father had--once," she said in a low voice. "But as his
means diminished, he saw less and less of those who had known him. For
the last two years I do not think that he saw an Englishman at home.
Before that time I was in a convent school, and I do not know."

"You are a Roman Catholic, then?"

"No. And for that reason--and for another, that my account was not
paid"--her color rose painfully to her face--"I could not apply to the
Sisters. I am very frank," she added, her lip trembling.

"And I encroach," he answered, bowing. "Forgive me! Your father was an
artist, I believe?"

"He drew for an Atelier de Porcelaine--for the journals when he could.
But he was not very successful," she continued reluctantly. "The china
factory which had employed him since he came to Paris, failed. When I
returned from school he was alone and poor, living in the little
