"Sho!" said Mrs. Toft with scorn. "What's he in it, I'd like to know?
But there, you've said what you come to say and it's time we left the
young lady to herself."

Mary raised her head. "One moment," she said. "I want to thank you all
for what you've done. And for what Petch says about the flask, he's
right to speak out, but I can't think any one would touch my uncle.
Only--can we do nothing? Nothing more? Nothing at all? If we don't
find him to-night----" She broke off, overcome by her feelings.

"I'm afraid not, Miss," Petch said gently. "We'd all be willing,
but we don't know where to look. I own I'm fair beat. Still Tom and
I'll stay an hour or two with Toft in case of anything happening.
Good-night, Miss. You're very welcome, I'm sure."

The others murmured their sympathy as they trooped out into the
darkness. Mrs. Toft bustled away for the tea, and Mary was left alone.

Suspense lay heavy on her. She felt that she ought to be doing
something and she did not know what to do. Dr. Pepper did not come,
the Tofts were but servants. They could not take the onus, they could
not share her burden; and Toft was a broken reed. Meanwhile time
pressed. Hours, nay, minutes might make all the difference between
life and death.

When Etruria came in with Mary's tea she found her mistress bending
over the fire in an attitude of painful depression, and she said a few
words, trying to impart to her something of her own patience. That
patience was a fine thing in Etruria because it was natural. But Mary
was of sterner stuff. She had a more lively imagination, and she could
not be blind to the issues, or to the value of every moment that
passed. Even while she listened to Etruria she saw with the eyes of
fancy a hollow amid a clump of trees not far from a pool that she
knew. In summer it was a pleasant dell, clothed with mosses and ferns
and the flowers of the bog-bean; in winter a dank, sombre hollow.
There she saw her uncle lie, amid the decaying leaves, the mud, the
rank grass; and the vision was too much for her. What if he were
really lying there, while she sat here by the fire? Sat here in this
home which he--he had given her, amid the comforts which he had
provided!

The thought was horrible, and she turned fiercely on the comforter.
"Don't!" she cried. "You don't think! You don't understand! We can't
go through the night like this! They must go on looking! Fetch your
father! And bring Petch! Bring them here!" she cried.

Etruria went, alarmed by her excitement, but almost as quickly she
came back. Toft had gone out with Petch and the other man. They would
not be long.

Mary cried out on them, but could do no more than walk the room, and
after a time Etruria coaxed her to sit down and eat; and tea and food
restored her balance. Still, as she sat and ate she listened--she
listened always. And Etruria, taught by experience, let her be and
said nothing.

At last, "How long they are!" Mary cried. "What are they doing? Are
they never----"

She stopped. The footsteps of two men coming through the hall had
reached her ears, and she recognized the tread of one--recognized it
with a rush of relief so great, of thankfulness so overwhelming that
she was startled and might well have been more than startled, had she
been free to think of anything but the lost man. It was Basset's step,
and she knew it--she would have known it, she felt, among a hundred!
He had come! An instant later he stood in the doorway, booted and
travel-stained, his whip in his hand, just as he had dropped from the
saddle--and with a face grave indeed, but calm and confident. He
seemed to her to bring relief, help, comfort, safety, all in one!

"Oh!" she cried. "You are here! How--how good of you!"

"Not good at all," he answered, advancing to the table and quietly
taking off his gloves. "Your messenger met me half-way to Blore. I was
coming into Riddsley to a meeting. I had only to ride on. Of course I
came."

"But the meeting?" she asked fearfully. Was he only come to go again?

"D--n the meeting!" he answered, moved to anger by the girl's pale
face. "Will you give me a cup of tea, Toft? I will hear Miss Audley's
account first. Keep Petch and the other man. We shall want them. In
twenty minutes I'll talk to you. That will do."

Ah, with what gratitude, with what infinite relief, did Mary hear his
tone of authority! He watched Toft out of the room and, alone with
her, he looked at her. He saw that her hand shook as she filled the
teapot, that her lips quivered, that she tried to speak and could not.
And he felt an infinite love and pity, though he drove both out of his
voice when he spoke. "Yes, tea first," he said coolly, as he took off
his riding coat. "I've had a long journey. You must take another cup
with me. You can leave things to me now. Yes, two lumps, please, and
not too strong." He knocked together the logs, and warmed his hands,
stooping over the fire with his back to her. Then he took his place at
the table, and when he had drunk half a cup of tea, "Now," he said,
"will you tell me the story from the beginning. And take time. More
haste, less speed, you know."

With a calmness that surprised herself, Mary told the tale. She
described the first alarm, the hunt through the house, the discoveries
in the bedroom, Toft's breakdown, last of all the search through the
park and the finding of the flask.

He listened gravely, asking a question now and then. When she had
done, "What of Toft?" he inquired. "Not been very active, has he? Not
given you much help?"

"No! But how did you guess?" she asked in surprise.

"I'm afraid that Toft knows more than he has told you. For the rest,"
he looked at her kindly, "I want you to give up the hope of finding
your uncle alive. I have none. But I think I can promise you that
there has been no suffering. If it turns out as I imagine, he was dead
before he was missed. What the doctor expected has happened. That is
all."

"I don't understand," she said.

"And I don't want to say more until I know for certain. May I ring for
Toft?" She nodded. He rang, and after a pause, during which he stood,
silent and waiting, the servant came in. He shot a swift glance at
them, and dropped his eyes.

"Tell Petch and the other man to be ready to start with us in five
minutes," Basset said. "Let them fetch a hurdle, and do you put a
mattress on it. I suppose--you made sure he was dead, Toft, before you
left him?"

The man flinched before the sudden question, but he showed less
emotion than Mary. Perhaps he had expected it. After a pause, during
which Basset did not take his eyes from him, "I made sure," he said in
a low voice. "As God sees me, I did! But if you think I raised a hand
to him----"

"I don't!" Basset said sternly. "I don't think so badly of you as
that. But nothing but frankness can save you now. Is he in the Great
House?"

Toft opened his mouth, but he seemed unable to speak. He nodded.

"What about the flask?"

"I dropped it," the man muttered. He turned a shade paler. "I could
not bear to think he was lying there. I thought it would lead the
search--that way, and they would find him."

"I see. That's enough now. Be ready to start at once."

The man went out. "Good heavens!" Mary cried. She was horror-stricken.
"And he has known it all this time! Do you think that he--he had any
part----"

"Oh no. He was alone with Mr. Audley when he collapsed, and he lost
his head. They were together in the Great House--it was a difficult
position--and he did not see his way to explain. He may have seen
some advantage in gaining time--I don't know. The first thing to be
done is to bring your uncle home. I will see to that. You have borne
up nobly--you have done your part. Do you go to bed now."

Something in his tone, and in his thought for her, brought old times
to Mary's mind and the blood to her pale cheek. She did not say no,
but she would not go to bed. She made Etruria come to her, and the two
girls sat in the parlor listening and waiting, moving only when it was
necessary to snuff the candles. It was a grim vigil. An hour passed,
two hours. At length they caught the first distant murmur, the tread
of men who moved slowly and heavily under a burden--there are few who
have not at one time or another heard that sound. Little by little the
shuffling feet, the subdued orders, the jar of a stumbling bearer,
drew nearer, became more clear. A gust of wind swept through the hall,
and moaned upwards through the ancient house. The candles on the table
flickered. And still the two sat spell-bound, clasping cold hands, as
the unseen procession passed over the threshold, and for the last time
John Audley came home to sleep amid his books--heedless now of right
or claim, or rank or blood.

                          *   *   *   *   *

A few minutes later Basset entered the parlor. His face betrayed his
fatigue, and his first act was to go to the sideboard and drink a
glass of wine. Mary saw that his hand shook as he raised the glass,
and gratitude for what he had done for her brought the tears to her
eyes. He stood a moment, leaning in utter weariness against the
wall--he had ridden far that day. And Mary had been no woman if she
had not drawn comparisons.

Opportunity had served him, and had not served the other. Nor, had her
betrothed been here, could he have helped her in this pinch. He could
not have taken Basset's place, nor with all the will in the world
could he have done what Basset had done.

That was plain. Yet deep down in her there stirred a faint resentment,
a complaint hardly acknowledged. Audley was not here, but he might
have been. It was his doing that she had not told her uncle, and that
John Audley had passed away in ignorance. It was his doing that in her
trouble she had had to lean on the other. It was not the first time
during the long hours of the day that the thought had come to her; and
though she had put it away, as she put it away now, the opening flower
of love is delicate--the showers pass but leave their mark.

When Etruria had slipped out, and left them, Basset came forward,
and warmed himself at the fire. "Perhaps it is as well you did not go
to bed," he said. "You can go now with an easy mind. It was as I
thought--he lay on the stairs of the Great House and he had been dead
many hours. Dr. Pepper will tell us more to-morrow, but I have no
doubt that he died of syncope brought on by exertion. Toft had tried
to give him brandy."

Shocked and grieved, yet sensible of relief, she was silent for a
time. She had known John Audley less than a year, but he had been good
to her in his way and she sorrowed for him. But at least she was freed
from the nightmare which had ridden her all day. Or was she? "May I
know what took him there?" she asked in a low voice. "And Toft?"

"He believed that there were papers in the Great House, which would
prove his claim. It was an obsession. He asked me more than once to go
with him and search for them, and I refused. He fell back on Toft.
They had begun to search--so Toft tells me--when Mr. Audley was taken
ill. Before he could get him down the stairs, the end came. He sank
down and died."

With a shudder Mary pictured the scene in the empty house. She saw the
light of the lantern fall on the huddled group, as the panic-stricken
servant strove to pour brandy between the lips of the dying man; and
truly she was thankful that in this strait she had Basset to support
her, to assist her, to advise her! "It is very dreadful," she said. "I
do not wonder that Toft gave way. But had he--had my uncle--any right
to be there?"

"In his opinion, yes. And if the papers were there, they were his
papers, the house was his, all was his. In my opinion he was wrong.
But if he believed anything, he believed that he was justified in what
he did."

"I am glad of that!"

"There must be an inquest, I am afraid," Basset continued. "One or two
will know, and one or two more will guess what Mr. Audley's errand
was. But Lord Audley will have nothing to gain by moving in it. And if
only for your sake--but you must go to bed. Etruria is waiting in the
hall. I will send her to you. Good-night."

She stood up. She wished to thank him, she longed to say something,
anything, which would convey to him what his coming had been to her.
But she could not find words, she was tongue-tied. And Etruria came
in.




                            CHAPTER XXVIII

                        THE NEWS FROM RIDDSLEY


The business which had taken Audley away on the morrow of his
engagement had been no mere pretext. The crisis in political life
which Peel's return to office had brought about was one of those
upheavals which are of rare promise to the adventurous. The wise
foresaw that the party which Sir Robert had led would be riven from
top to bottom. Old allies would be flung into opposing camps, and
would be reaching out every way for support. New men would be learning
their value, and to those who dared, all things might be added.
Places, prizes, honors, all might be the reward of those who knew how
to choose their side with prudence and to support it with courage. The
clubs were like hives of bees. All day long and far into the winter
night Pall Mall roared under the wheels of carriages. About the doors
of Whitehall Gardens, where Peel lived, men gathered like vultures
about the prey. And, lo, in a twinkling and as by magic the
Conservative party vanished in a cloud of dust, to reappear a few days
later in the guise of Peelites and Protectionists--Siamese twins, who
would not live together, and could not live apart.

At such a time it was Audley's first interest to be as near as
possible to the hub of things and to place himself in evidence as a
man concerned. He had a little influence in the Foreign Office, he had
his vote in the House of Lords. And though he did not think that these
would suffice, he trusted that, reinforced by the belief that he
carried the seat at Riddsley in his pocket, they might be worth
something to him.

Unfortunately he could deal with one side only. If Stubbs were right
he could pass for the owner of the borough only as long as he opposed
Sir Robert. He could return the younger Mottisfont and have the credit
of returning him, in the landed interest; but however much it might
suit his book--and it was of that book he was thinking as he travelled
to Lord Seabourne's--he could not, if Stubbs were right, return a
member in the other interest.

Now when a man can sell to one party only, tact is needed if he is to
make a good bargain. Audley saw this. But he knew his own qualities
and he did not despair. The occasion was unique, and he thought that
it would be odd if he could not pluck from the confusion something
worth having; some place under the Foreign Office, a minor embassy, a
mission, something worth two, or three, or even four thousand a year.

He travelled up to town thinking steadily of the course he would
pursue, and telling himself that he must be as cunning as the serpent
and as gentle as the dove. He must let no whip cajole him, and no Tory
browbeat him. For he had only this to look to now: a rich marriage was
no longer among the possibilities. Not that he regretted his decision
in that matter as yet, but at times he wondered at it. He told himself
that he had been impulsive, and setting this down to the charms of his
mistress he gave himself credit for disinterested motives. And then,
too, he had made himself safe!

Still there were difficulties in the way of his ambition, which
appeared more clearly at Seabourne Castle, where Lady Adela was a
fellow-guest, and in London than at Riddsley; difficulties of shrewd
whips, who knew the history of the borough by heart, and had figures
at their fingers' ends; difficulties of arrogant leaders, who talked
of his duty to the land and assumed that duty was its own reward.
Above all, there was the difficulty that he could only sell to the
party that was out of office and must pay in promises--bills drawn at
long dates and for which no discounters could be found. For who could
say when the landed interest, made up of stupid bull-headed men like
Lord George Bentinck and Stubbs, a party without a leader and with
divided counsels, would be in power? They were a mob rather than a
party, and like every other mob were ready to sacrifice future
prospects to present revenge.

That was a terrible difficulty, and his lordship did not see how he
was to get over it. To the Peelites who could pay, cash down, in
honors and places, he could not sell. Nor to the Liberals under little
Lord John, though to their promises some prospect of office gave
value. So that at times he almost despaired. For he had only this to
look to now; if he failed in this he would have love and he would have
Mary, and he would have safety, but very little besides. If his word
had not been given to Mary, he might almost have reconsidered the
matter.

The die was cast, however. Yet many a man has believed this, and then
one fine morning he has begun to wonder if it is so--the cast was such
an unlucky, if not an unfair one! And presently he has seen that at
the cost of a little pride, or a little consistency, or what not, he
might call the game drawn. That is, he might--if he were not the soul
of honor that he is!

By and by under the stress of circumstances his lordship began to
consider that point. He did not draw back, he did not propose to draw
back; but he thought that he would keep the door behind him ajar. To
begin with, he did not overwhelm Mary with letters--his public
engagements were so many; and when he wrote he wrote on ordinary
matters. His pen ran more glibly on party gossip than on their joint
future; he wrote as he might have written to a cousin rather than to
his sweetheart. But he told himself that Mary was not versed in love
letters, nor very passionate. She would expect no more.

Then one fine morning he had a letter from Stubbs, which told him that
there was to be a real contest in Riddsley, that the Horn and Corn
platform was to be challenged, and that the assailant was Peter
Basset. Stubbs added that the Working Men's Institute was beside
itself with joy, that Hatton's and Banfield's hands were solid for
repeal, and that the fight would be real, but that the issue was a
foregone conclusion.

The news was not altogether unwelcome. The contest gave value to the
seat, and increased my lord's claim; on that party, unfortunately,
they could only pay in promises. It also tickled my lord's vanity. His
rival, unhorsed in the lists of love, had betaken himself, it seemed,
to other lists, in which he would as surely be beaten.

"Poor beggar!" Audley thought. "He was always a day late! Always came
in second! I don't know that I ever knew anything more like him than
this! From the day I first saw him, standing behind John Audley's
counsel at the suit, right to this day, he has always been a loser!"

And he smiled as he recalled the poor figure Basset had cut as a
squire of dames.

A week later Stubbs wrote again, and this time his news was startling.
John Audley was dead. Stubbs wrote in the first alarm of the
discovery, word of which had just been brought into the town. He knew
no particulars, but thought that his lordship should be among the
first to learn the fact. He added a hasty postscript, in which he said
that Mr. Basset was proving himself a stronger candidate than either
side had expected, and that not only were the brass-workers with him
but a few of the smaller fry of tradesmen, caught by his cry of cheap
bread. Stubbs closed, however, with the assurance that the landed
interest would carry it by a solid majority.

"D--n their impudence!" Lord Audley exclaimed. And after that he gave
no further heed to the postscript. As long as the issue was certain,
the election was Mottisfont's and Stubbs's affair. As for Basset, the
more money he chose to waste the better.

But John Audley's death was news--it was great news! So he was gone at
last--the man whom he had always regarded as a menace! Whom he had
feared, whose very name had rung mischief in his ears, by whom, during
many a sleepless night, he had seen himself ousted from all that he
had gained from title, income, lands, position! He was gone at last;
and gone with him were the menace, the danger, the night alarms, the
whole pile of gloomy fancies which apprehension had built up!

The relief was immense. Audley read the letter twice, and it seemed to
him that a weight was lifted from him. John Audley was dead. In his
dressing-gown and smoking-cap my lord paced his rooms at the Albany
and said again and again, "He's dead! By gad, he's dead!" Later, he
could not refrain from the thought that if the death had taken place a
few weeks earlier, in that first attack, he would have been under no
temptation to make himself safe. As it was--but he did not pursue the
thought. He only reflected that he had followed love handsomely!

A day later a third letter came from Stubbs, and one from Mary. The
tidings they brought were such that my lord's face fell as he read
them, and he swore more than once over them. John Audley, the lawyer
wrote, had been found dead in the Great House. He had been found lying
on the stairs, a lantern beside him. Stubbs had visited the house the
moment the facts became known. He had examined the muniment room and
found part of the wall broken down, and in the room two boxes of
papers which had been taken from a recess which the breach had
disclosed. One of the boxes had been broken open. At present Stubbs
could only say that the papers had been disturbed, he could not say
whether any were missing. He begged his lordship--he was much
disturbed, it was clear--to come down as quickly as possible. In the
meantime, he would go through the papers and prepare a report. They
appeared to be family documents, old, and not hitherto known to his
lordship's advisers.

Audley was still swearing, when his man came in. "Will you wear the
black velvet vest, my lord?" he asked, "or the flowered satin?"

"Go to the devil!" his master cried--so furiously that the man fled
without more.

When he was gone Audley read the letter again, and came to the
conclusion that in making himself safe he had builded more wisely than
he knew. For who could say what John Audley had found? Or who, through
those papers, had a hold on him? He remembered the manservant's visit,
and the thing looked black. Very black. Alive or dead, John Audley
threatened him.

Then he felt bitterly angry with Stubbs. There had been the most
shocking carelessness. Had he not himself pointed out what was going
on? Had he not put it to Stubbs that the place should be guarded? But
the lawyer, stubborn in his belief that there were no papers there,
had done nothing. Nothing! And this had come of it! This which might
spell ruin!

Or, no. Stubbs had indeed done his best to ruin him, but he had saved
himself. He turned with relief to Mary's letter.

It was written sadly, and it was rather cold. He noticed this, but her
tone did not alarm him, because he set it down to the reserve of his
own letters.

He took care to answer this letter, however, by that day's post, and
he wrote more affectionately than before--as if her trouble had broken
down a reserve natural to him. He wrote with tact, too. He could not
attend the funeral; the dead man's feelings towards him forbade that
he should. But his agent would attend, and his carriage and servants.
When he had written the letter he was satisfied with it: more than
satisfied when he had added a phrase implying that their happiness
would not long be postponed.

After he had posted the letter he wondered if she would expect him to
come to her. It was a lonely house and with death in it--but no, in
the circumstances it was not possible. He would go down to The
Butterflies next day. That would be the most that could be expected of
him. He would be at hand if she needed anything.

But when the next day came he did not go. A letter from a man
belonging to the inner circle of politics reached him. The great man,
who had been and might be again in the Cabinet, suggested a meeting.
Nothing came of the meeting--it was one of those will-of-the-wisps
that draw the unwary on until they find themselves committed. But it
kept Audley in London, and it was not until the evening of Monday, the
day of the funeral, that, chilled and out of temper, after posting the
last stage from Stafford, he reached his quarters at The Butterflies,
and gave short answers to Mrs. Jenkinson's inquiries after his health.

"Poor dear young man!" she said, when she rejoined her sisters. "He
has a kind heart and he feels it. Mr. John was Mr. John, and odd, very
odd. But still he was an Audley!"




                             CHAPTER XXIX

                           THE AUDLEY BIBLE


Angry with Stubbs as he was--and with some reason--Lord Audley was
not the man to bite off his nose to spite his face. He pondered long
what he would say to him, and more than once he rehearsed the scene,
toning down this phrase and pruning that. For he knew that after all
Stubbs was a good agent. He was honest, he thought much and made much
of the property, and nothing would be gained by changing him. Then his
influence in the borough was such that even if my lord quarrelled with
him, Mottisfont would hardly venture to discard him.

For these reasons Audley had no mind to break with his agent. But he
did wish to punish him. He did wish to make his displeasure felt. And
he wished this the more because he began to suspect that if Stubbs had
been less bigoted, he might have carried the borough the way he
wished--the way that would pay him best.

Stubbs on his side foresaw an unpleasant quarter of an hour. He had
been too easy. He had paid too little heed to John Audley's
trespasses, and had let things pass that he should have stopped. Then,
too, he had been over-positive that there were no more documents at
the Great House. Evil had not come of this, but it might have; and he
made up his mind to hear some hard words.

But when he obeyed my lord's summons his reception tried his patience.
A bright fire burned in the grate, half a dozen wax candles shed a
softened light on the room. The wine stood at Audley's elbow, and his
glass was half full. But he did not give Stubbs even two fingers, nor
did he ask him to take wine. And his tone was colder than Stubbs had
ever known it. He made it plain that he was receiving a servant, and a
servant with whom he was displeased.

Still he was Lord Audley, something of divine right survived in him,
and Stubbs knew that he had been himself in the wrong. He took the
bull by the horns. "You are displeased, my lord," he said, as he took
the seat to which the other pointed. "And I admit with some cause. I
have been mistaken and, perhaps, a little remiss! But it is the
exception, and it will be a lesson to me. I am sorry, my lord," he
added frankly. "I can say no more than that."

"And much good that will do us," my lord growled, "in certain events,
Mr. Stubbs!"

"At any rate it will be a sharp lesson to me," Stubbs replied. "It has
cost Mr. Audley his life."

"He had no right to be there!"

"No, my lord, he had no right to be there. But he would not have been
there if I had seen that the place was properly secured. I take all
the blame."

"Unfortunately," the other flung at him contemptuously, "you cannot
pay the penalty; that may fall upon me. Anyway, it was a d--d silly
thing, Mr. Stubbs, to leave the place open, and you see what has come
of it."

"I cannot deny it, my lord," Stubbs said patiently. "But I hope that
nothing will come of it. I will tell your lordship first what my own
observations were. I made a careful examination of the two chests of
papers and I came to the conclusion that Mr. Audley had done little
more than open the first when he was taken ill. One chest showed some
disturbance. The upper layer had been taken out and replaced. The
other box had not been opened."

"What if he found what he wanted and searched no further?" Audley
asked grimly. "But the point of the matter does not lie there. It lies
in another direction, as I should have thought any lawyer would see."

"My lord?"

"Who was with him?" Lord Audley rapped the table with his fingers.
"That's the point, sir! Who was with him?"

"I think I have ascertained that," Stubbs replied, less put out than
his employer expected. "I have little doubt that his man-servant, a
man called Toft, was with him."

"Ha!" the other exclaimed, "I expected that!"

Stubbs raised his eyebrows. "You know him, my lord?"

"I know him for a d--d blackmailing villain!" Audley broke out. Then
he remembered himself. He had not told Stubbs of the blackmailing.
And, after all, what did it matter? He had made himself safe. Whatever
papers he had found, John Audley was dead, and John Audley's heiress
was going to be his wife! The danger to him was naught, and the
blackmailer was already disarmed. Still he was not going to spare
Stubbs by telling him that. Instead, "What did the boxes contain?" he
asked ungraciously.

"Nothing of any value when I examined them, my lord. Old surrenders,
fines, and recoveries with some ancient terriers. I could find no
document among them that related to the title."

"That may be," Audley retorted. "But John Audley expected to find
something that related to the title! He knew more than we knew. He
knew that those boxes existed, and he knew what he expected to find in
them."

"No doubt. And if your lordship had given me a little more time I
should have explained before this that he was disappointed in his
expectation; nay, more, that it was that disappointment--as I have
little doubt--that caused his collapse and death."

"How the devil do you know that?"

"If your lordship will have patience I will explain," Stubbs said, a
gleam of malice in his eyes. He rose from his seat and took from a
chair beside the door a parcel which he had laid there on his
entrance. "I have here that which he found, and that which I don't
doubt caused his death."

"The deuce you have!" Audley cried, rising to his feet in his
surprise. And he watched with all his eyes while the lawyer slowly
untied the tape and spread wide the wrappers. The action disclosed a
thick quarto volume bound in blue leather, sprinkled on the sides with
silver butterflies, and stamped with the arms of Audley. "Good G--d!"
Audley continued, "the Family Bible!"

"Yes, the Family Bible," the lawyer answered, gazing at it
complacently, "about which there was so much talk at the opening of
the suit. It was identified by a score of references, called for by
both sides, sought for high and low, and never produced!"

"And here it is!"

"Here it is. Apparently at some time or other it went out of fashion,
was laid aside and lost sight of, and eventually bricked up with a
mass of old and valueless papers."

Audley steadied his voice with difficulty. "And what is its effect?"
he asked.

"Its effect, my lord, is to corroborate our case in every particular,"
the lawyer answered proudly. "Its entries form a history of the family
for a long period, and amongst them is an entry of the marriage of
Peter Paravicini Audley on the date alleged by us; an entry made in
the handwriting of his father, and one of eleven made by the same
hand. This entry agrees in every particular with the suspected
statement in the register which we support, and fully bears out our
case."

"And John Audley found that?" my lord cried, after a moment of
pregnant silence. He had regained his composure. His eyes were
shining.

"Yes, and it killed him," Stubbs said gravely. "Doubtless he came on
it at the moment when he thought success was within his grasp, and the
shock was too much for him."

"Good Lord! Good Lord! And how did you get it?"

"From Mr. Basset."

"Basset?"

"Who obtained it, I have no doubt, from the man, Toft, either by
pressure or purchase."

"The rascal! The d--d rascal! He ought to be prosecuted!"

"Possibly," the lawyer agreed. "But he was only an accomplice, and we
could not prosecute him without involving others; without bringing Mr.
John's name into it--and he is dead. As a fact, I have passed my word
to Mr. Basset that no steps should be taken against him, and I think
your lordship will agree with me that I could not do otherwise."

"Still--the man ought to be punished!"

"He ought, but if any one has paid for his silence or for this book,
it is not we."

After that there was a little more talk about the Bible, which my lord
examined with curiosity, about the singularity of its discovery, about
the handwriting of the entries, which the lawyer said he could himself
prove. Stubbs was made free of the decanter, and of everything but my
lord's mind. For Audley said nothing of his engagement to Mary--the
moment was hardly opportune; and nothing--it was too late in the
day--of Toft's former exploit. He stood awhile absorbed and dreaming,
staring through the haze of the candles. Here at last was final and
complete relief. No more fears, no more calculations. Here was an end
at last of the feeling that there was a mine under him. Traditions,
when they are bred in the bone, die slowly, and many a time he had
been hard put to it to resist the belief, so long whispered, that his
branch was illegitimate. At last the tradition was dead. There was no
more need to play for safety. What he had he had, and no one could
take it from him.

And presently the talk passed to the election.

"There's no doubt," Stubbs said, "that Mr. Basset is a stronger
candidate than either side expected."

"But he's no politician! He has no experience!"

The lawyer sat forward, with his legs apart and a hand on either knee.
"No," he said. "But the truth is, though it is beyond me how a
gentleman of his birth can be so misled, he believes what he says--and
it goes down!"

"Is he a speaker?"

"He is and he isn't! I slipped in myself one night at the back of one
of the new-fangled meetings his precious League has started. I wanted
to see, my lord, if any of our people were there. I heard him for ten
minutes, and at the start he was so jumpy I thought that he would
break down. But when he got going--well, I saw how it was and what
took the people. He believes what he says, and he says it plain. The
way he painted Peel giving up everything, sacrificing himself,
sacrificing his party, sacrificing his reputation, sacrificing all to
do what he thought was right--the devil himself wouldn't have known
his own!"

"He almost converted you?"

The lawyer laughed disdainfully. "Not a jot!" he said. "But I saw that
he would convert some. Not many," Stubbs continued complacently.
"There's some that mean to, but will think better of it at the last.
And some would but daren't! Two or three may. Still, he's such a
candidate as we've not had against us before, my lord. And with cheap
bread and the preachings of this plaguy League--I shall be glad when
it is over."

Audley rose and poked the fire. "You're not going to tell me," he
said, in a voice that was unnaturally even, "that he's going to beat
us? You're not going, after all the assurances you've given me----"

"God forbid," Stubbs replied. "No, no, my lord! Mr. Mottisfont will
hold the seat! I mean only that it will be a nearer thing--a nearer
thing than it has been."

He had no idea that his patron was fighting a new spasm of anger; that
the thought that he might, after all, have dealt with Sir Robert, the
thought that he might, after all, have bargained with the party in
power, was almost too much for the other's self-command. It was too
late now, of course. It was too late. But if the contest was to be so
close, surely if he had cast his weight on the other side, he might
have carried it!

And what if the seat were lost? Then this stubborn, confident fool,
who was as bigoted in his faith as the narrowest Leaguer of them all,
had done him a deadly injury! My lord bit off an oath, and young as he
was, his face wore a very apoplectic look as he turned round, after
laying down the poker.

"That reminds me," the lawyer resumed, blandly unconscious of the
crisis, and of the other's anger. "I meant to ask your lordship what's
to be done about the two Boshams. You remember them, my lord? They've
had the small holding by the bridge with the water meadow time out of
mind--for seven generations they say. They pay eighteen pounds as
joint tenants, and have votes as old freemen."

"What of them?" the other asked impatiently.

"Well, I'm afraid they'll not support us."

"Do you mean that they'll not vote for Mottisfont?"

"I'm afraid not," Stubbs answered. "They're as stubborn as their own
pigs! I've spoken to them myself and told them that they've only one
thing to expect if they go against their landlord."

"And that is, to go out!" Audley said. "Well, make that quite clear to
them, Stubbs, and depend upon it--they'll see differently."

"I'm afraid they won't, my lord, and that is why I trouble you. They
voted against the last lord--twice, I am told--and the story goes that
he laid his stick about Ben Bosham's shoulders in the street--that
would be in '31, I fancy. But he didn't turn them out--they'd been in
the holding so long."

"Two votes may have been nothing to him," Audley replied coldly. "They
are something to me. They will vote for Mottisfont or they will go,
Stubbs. That is flat, and do you see to it. There, I'm tired now," he
continued, rising from his seat.

Stubbs rose. "I don't know if your lordship's heard about Mr. John's
will!"

"No!" My lord straightened himself. Earlier in the day he had given
some thought to this, and had weighed Mary Audley's chances of
inheriting what John Audley had. "No!" he said. And he waited.

"He has left the young lady eight thousand pounds."

"Eight thousand!" Audley ejaculated. "Do you mean--he must have had
more than that? He wasted a small fortune in that confounded suit. But
he must have had--four times that, man!"

"The residue goes to Mr. Basset."

"Basset!" Audley cried, his face flushed with passion. "To Basset?" he
repeated. "Good G--d!"

"So I'm told, my lord," the lawyer answered, staggered by the temper
in which his employer received the news.

"But Miss Audley was his own niece! Basset? He was no relation to
him!"

"They were very old friends."

"That's no reason why he should leave him thirty thousand pounds of
Audley money! Money taken straight out of the Audley property! Thirty
thousand----"

"Not thirty, my lord," Stubbs ventured. "Not much above twenty, I
should say. If you put it----"

"If I put it that you were--something of a fool at times," the angry
man cried, "I shouldn't be far wrong! But there, there, never mind!
Good-night! Can't you see I'm dead tired and hardly know what I am
saying? Come to-morrow! Come at eleven in the morning."

Stubbs hardly knew how to take it. But after a moment's hesitation, he
made the best of the apology, muttered something, and got out of the
room. On the stairs he relieved his feelings by a word or two. In the
street he wondered what had taken the man so suddenly. Surely he had
not expected to get the money!




                             CHAPTER XXX

                           A FRIEND IN NEED


Basset had obtained the missing Bible very much in the way the lawyer
had indicated--partly by purchase and partly by pressure. Shocked as
Toft had been by his master's sudden death, he had had the presence of
mind to remember that he might make something of what they had
discovered could he secrete it; and with every nerve quivering the man
had fought down panic until he had hidden the parcel which had caused
John Audley's collapse. Then he had given way. He had turned his back
on the Great House, and shuddering, clutched at by grisly hands,
pursued by phantom feet, he had fled through the night and the Yew
Walk, to hide, for the present at least, his part in the tragedy.

Basset, however, had known too much for him, and the servant, shaken
by what had happened, had not been able to persist in his denials. But
to tell and to give were two things, and it is doubtful whether he
would have released his plunder if Basset had not in the last resort
disclosed to him Miss Audley's engagement to her cousin.

The change which this news wrought in Toft had astonished Basset. The
man had gone down under it as under a blow on the head. The spirit had
gone out of him, and he had taken with thankfulness the sum which
Basset, as John Audley's representative, had offered him--rather out
of pity than because it seemed necessary. He had given up the parcel
on the night before the funeral.

The book in his hands, Basset had hastened to be rid of it. Cynically
he had told himself that he did so, lest he too might give way to the
ignoble impulse to withhold it. Audley was his rival, but that he
might have forgiven, as men forgive great wrongs and in time smile on
their enemies. But the little wrongs, who can forgive these--the
slight, the sneer, the assumption of superiority, the upper hand
lightly taken and insolently held?

Not Peter Basset, at a moment when he was being tried almost beyond
bearing. For every day, between the finding of the body and the
funeral, and often more than once in the day he had to see Mary, he
had to advise her, he had--for there was no one else--to explain
matters to her, to bear her company. He had to quit this meeting and
that Ordinary--for election business stops for no man--and to go to
her. He had to find her alone and to see her face light up at his
entrance; he had to look back, and to see her watch him as he rode
from the door. Nor when he was absent from the Gatehouse was it any
better; nay, it was worse. For then he was forced to think of her as
alone and sad, he had to picture her brooding over the fire, he had to
fancy her at her solitary meals. And alike, with her or away from her,
he had to damp down the old passion, as well as the new regret that
each day and each hour and every kind look on her part fanned into a
flame. Nor was even this all; every day he saw that she grew more
grave, daily he saw her color fading, and he did not know what qualms
she masked, what nightmares she might be suffering in that empty
house--nay, what cause for unhappiness she might be hiding. At
last--it was the afternoon before the funeral--he could bear it no
longer, and he spoke.

"You ought not to be here!" he said bluntly. "Why doesn't Audley fetch
you away?" He was standing before the fire drawing on his gloves as he
prepared to leave. The room was full of shadows, for he had chosen a
time when she could not see his face.

She tried to fence with him. "I am afraid," she said, "that some
formalities will be necessary before he can do that."

"Then why is he not here?" he retorted. "Or why doesn't he send some
one to be with you? You ought not to be alone. Mrs. Jenkinson at The
Butterflies--she's a good soul--you know her?"

"Yes."

"She'd come at a word. I know it's not my business----"

"Or you would go about it, I am sure," she replied gently, "with as
much respect to my wishes as Lord Audley shows."

"Your wishes? But why--why do you wish----"

"Why do I wish to be alone?" she answered. "Because I owe something to
my uncle. Because I owe him a little thought and some remembrance. He
made my old life for me--would you have me begin the new one before he
is in the grave? This was his house--would you have me entertain Lord
Audley in it?" She stood up, slender and straight, with the table
between them--and he did not guess that her knees were trembling.
"Please to understand," she continued, "that Lord Audley and I are
entirely at one in this. We have our lives before us, and it were
indeed selfish of us, and ungrateful of me, if we grudged a few days
to remembrance. As selfish," she continued bravely--and he did not
know that she braced herself anew--"as if I were ever to forget the
friend who was _his_ friend, whose kindness has never failed me, whose
loyalty has never--" she broke down there. She could not go on.

"Add, too," he said gruffly, "who has robbed you of the greater part
of your inheritance! Don't forget that!" He had been explaining the
effect of John Audley's will to her. It had been opened that morning.

His roughness helped her to recover herself. "I do not know what you
mean by 'inheritance,'" she said. "My uncle has left me the portion
his wife brought to him. I am more than satisfied. I am very grateful.
My only fear is that, had he known of my engagement, he would not have
wished me to have this."

"The will was made before you came to live here," Basset said. "The
eight thousand was left to you because you were his brother's child.
It was the least he could do for you, and had he made a new will he
would doubtless have increased it. But," breaking off, "I must be
going." Yet he still stood, and he still tapped the table with the
end of his riding-crop. "When is Audley coming?" he asked suddenly.
"To-morrow?"

"Yes, to-morrow."

"Well he ought to," he replied, without looking at her. "You should
not be here a day longer by yourself. It is not fitting. I shall see
you in the morning before we start for the church, but the lawyer will
be here and I shall not be able to come again. But I must be sure that
there is some one here." He spoke almost harshly, partly to impress
her, partly to hide his own feelings; and he did not suspect that she,
too, was fighting for calmness; that she was praying that he would go,
before she showed more clearly how much the parting tried her--before
every kind word, every thoughtful act, every toilsome journey taken on
her behalf, rose to her remembrance and swept away the remnants of her
self-control.

She had not imagined that she would feel the leave-taking as she did.
She could not speak, and she was thankful that it was too dark for him
to see her face. Would he never go? And still the slow tap-tap of his
whip on the table went on. It seemed to her that she would never
forget the sound! And if he touched her----

But he had no thought of touching her.

"Good-night," he said at last. He turned, moved away, lingered. At the
door he looked back. "I am going into the library," he said. "The
coffin will be closed in the morning."

"Yes, good-night," she muttered, thankful that the thought of the dead
man steadied her and gave her power to speak. "I shall see him in the
morning."

He closed the door, and she crept blindly to a chair, and covered by
the darkness she gave way. She told herself that she was thinking of
her uncle. But she knew that she deceived herself. She knew that her
uncle had little to do with her tears, or with the feeling of
loneliness that overcame her. Once more she had lost her friend--and a
friend so good, so kind. Only now did she know his value!

Five minutes later Basset crossed the court in search of his horse.
Mrs. Toft's door stood open and a stream of firelight and candlelight
poured from it and cut the January fog. She was hard at work, cooking
funeral meats with the help of a couple of women; for quietly as John
Audley had lived, he could not be buried without some stir. Odd people
would come, drawn by the Audley name, squires who boasted some distant
connection with the line, a few who had been intimate with him in past
days. And the gentry far and wide would send their carriages, and the
servants must be fed. Still the preparations jarred on Basset as he
crossed the court. He felt the bustle an outrage on the mourning girl
he had left, and on his own depression.

Probably Mrs. Toft had set the door open that she might waylay him,
for as he went by she came out and stopped him. "Mr. Basset, sir!" she
said in a low voice. "Is this true, what Toft tells me? I declare,
when I heard it, you could ha' knocked me down with a common dip!" She
was wiping her hands on her apron. "That the young lady is to marry
his lordship?"

"I believe it is true," Basset said coldly. "But you had better let
her take her own time to make it known. Toft should not have told
you."

"Never fear, sir, I'll not let on. But, Lord's sakes, who'd ha'
thought it? And she'll be my lady! Not that she's not an Audley, and
there's small differ, and she'll make none, or I don't know her! Well,
indeed, I hope she's wise, but wedding cake, make it as rich as you
like, it's soon stale. And for him, I don't know what the Master would
have said if he'd known it! I thought things would come out," with a
quick look at Basset, "quite otherways! And wished it, too!"

"Thank you, Mrs. Toft," he said quietly.

"Just so, sir, you'll excuse me. Well, it's not many months since the
young lady came, and look at the changes! With the old Master dead,
and you going in for elections--drat 'em, I say, plaguy things that
set folks by the ears--and Mr. Colet gone and 'Truria that unsettled,
and Toft for ever wool-gathering, I shall be glad when tomorrow's over
and I can sit down and sort things out a bit!"

"Yes, Mrs. Toft."

"And speaking of elections reminds me. You know they two Boshams of
the Bridge End, sir?"

"I know them. Yes."

Mrs. Toft sniffed. "They're sort of kin to me, and middling honest as
town folks go. But two silly fellows, always meddling and making and
gandering with things they'd ought to leave to the gentry! The old
lord was soft with them, and so they've a mind now to see who is the
stronger, they or his lordship."

"If you mean that they have promised to vote for me----"

"That's it, sir! Vote their living away, they will, and leave 'em
alone! Votes are for poor men to make a bit of money by, odd times;
but they two Boshams I've no patience with. Sally, Ben's wife, was
with me to-day, and the long and the short of it is, Mr. Stubbs has
told them that if they vote for you they'll go into the street."

"It's a hard case," Basset said. "But what can I do?"

"Don't ha' their votes. What's two votes to you? For the matter of
that," Mrs. Toft continued, thoroughly wound up, "what's all the
votes--put together? Bassets and Audleys, Audleys and Bassets were
knights of the shire, time never was, as all the country knows! But
for this little borough--place it's what your great-grandfather
wouldn't ha' touched with a pair of gloves! I'd leave it to the
riff-raff that's got money and naught else, and builds Institutes and
such like!"

"But you'd like cheap bread?" Basset said, smiling.

"Bread? Law, Mr. Basset, what's elections to do wi' bread? It's not
bread they're thinking of, cheap or dear. It's beer! Swim in it they
do, more shame to you gentry! I'll be bound to say there's three goes
to bed drunk in the town these days for two that goes sober! But
there, you speak to they Boshams, Mr. Basset, sir, and put some sense
into them!"

"I'm afraid I can't promise," he answered. "I'll see!"

But it was not of the Boshams he thought as he rode down the hill with
a tight rein--for between fog and frost the road was treacherous. He
was thinking of the man who had been his friend and of whose face,
sphinx-like in death, he had taken farewell in the library. And solemn
thoughts, thoughts such as at times visit most men, calmed his spirit.
The fret of the contest, the strivings of the platform, the rubs of
vanity flitted to a distance, they became small things. Even passion
lost its fever and love its selfishness; and he thought of Audley with
patience and of Mary as he would think of her in years to come, when
time had enshrined her, and she was but a memory, one of the things
that had shaped his life. He knew, indeed, that this mood would pass;
that passion would surge up again, that love would reach out to its
object, that memory would awake and wound him, that pain and
restlessness would be his for many days. But he knew also--in this
hour of clear views--that all these things would have an end, and only
the love,


              That seeketh not itself to please
              Nor of itself hath any care,


would remain with him.

Already it had carried him some way. In the matter of the election,
indeed, he might be wrong. He might have entered on it too
hastily--often he thought that he had--he might be of fibre too weak
for the task. It cost him much to speak, and the occasional failure,
the mistake, the rebuff, worried him for hours and even days. Trifles,
too, that would not have troubled another, troubled his conscience;
side-issues that were false, but that he must not the less support,
workers whom he despised and must still use, tools that soiled his
hands but were the only tools. Then the vulgar greeting, the tipsy
grasp, the friend in the market-place:--


              The man who hails you Tom or Jack
              And proves by thumps upon your back
                  How he esteems your merit!
              Who's such a friend that one had need
              Be very much his friend indeed
                  To pardon or to bear it!


these humiliated him. But worse, far worse, than all was his unhappy
gift of seeing the merits of the other side and of doubting the cause
which he had set out to champion. He had fits of lowness when he was
tempted to deny that honesty existed anywhere in politics; when Sir
Robert Peel no less than Lord George Bentinck--who was coming to the
front as the spokesman of the land--Cobden the Radical no less than
Lord John Russell, seemed to be bent only on their own advancement,
when all, he vowed, were of the School of the Cynics!

But were he right or wrong in his venture--and right or wrong he had
small hope of winning--he would not the less cling to the thing which
Mary had given him--the will to make something of his life, the
determination that he would leave the world, were it only the few
hundred acres that he owned, or the hamlet in which he lived, better
than he had found them. The turmoil of the election over, he would
devote himself to his property at Blore. There John Audley's twenty
thousand pounds opened a wide door. He would build, drain, manure,
make roads, re-stock. He would make all things new. From him as from a
centre comfort should flow. He saw himself growing old in the middle
of his people, a lonely, but not an unhappy man.

As he passed the bridge at Riddsley he thought of the Boshams, and
weary as he was, he drew rein at their door. Ben Bosham came out,
bare-headed; a short, elderly man with a bald forehead and a dirty
complexion, a man who looked like a cobbler rather than the cow-keeper
he was.

"Shut your door, Bosham," Basset said. "I want a word with you."

And when the man had done this, he stooped from the saddle and said a
few words to him in a low voice.

"Well, I'm dommed!" the other answered, peering up through the
darkness. "It be you, Squire, bain't it? But you're not meaning it?"

"I am," Basset replied in a low voice. "I'd not say, vote for him,
Bosham. But leave it alone. You're not called upon to ruin yourself."

"But ha' you thought," the man exclaimed, "that our two votes may make
the differ? That they may make you or mar you, Squire!"

"Well, I'd rather be marred than see you put out of your place,"
Basset answered. "Think it over, Bosham."

But Bosham repudiated even thought of it. This vote and his use of it,
this defiance of a lord, was, for the time, his very life. "I'll not
do it," he declared. "I couldn't do it! Nor I won't!" he repeated.
"We're freemen o' Riddsley, and almost the last of the freemen that
has votes as freemen! And while free we are, free we'll be, and vote
as we choose, Squire! Vote as we choose! I'd not show my face in the
town else! Mr. Stubbs may talk as gallus as he likes--and main ashamed
of himself he looked yesterday--he may talk as gallus as never was,
we'll not bend to no landlord, nor to no golden image!"

"Then there's no more to be said," Basset answered, feeling that he
cut a poor figure. "I don't wish you to do anything against your
conscience, Bosham, and I'm obliged to you and your brother for your
staunchness. I only wanted you to know that I should understand if you
stayed away."

"I'd chop my foot off first!" cried the patriot.

After which Basset had no choice but to leave him and to ride on,
feeling that he was himself too soft for the business--that he was a
round man in a square hole. He wondered what his committee would think
of him if they knew, and what Bosham thought of him--who did know. For
Bosham seemed to him at this moment a man of principle, a patriot,
nay, a very Brutus: whereas, Ben was in truth no better than a small
man of large conceit, whose vote was his one road to fame.




                             CHAPTER XXXI

                              BEN BOSHAM


It was Tuesday, market-day at Riddsley, and farmers' wives, cackling
as loudly as the poultry they carried, elbowed one another on the
brick pavements or clustered before the windows of the low-browed
shops. Farmers in white great-coats, with huge handkerchiefs about
their necks, streamed from the yards of the Packhorse and the Barley
Mow, and meeting a friend planted themselves in the roadway as firmly
as if they stood in their own pastures. Now and again a young spark,
fancying all eyes upon his four-year-old, sidled through the throng
with many a "Whoa!" and "Where be'st going, lad?" While on the steps
of the Market-Cross and about the long line of carts that rested on
their shafts in the open street, hucksters chaffered and house-wives
haggled over the rare egg or the keg of salted butter.

The quacking of ducks, the neighing of horses, the singsong of rustic
voices filled the streets. It was common talk that the place was as
full as at the March Fair. The excitement of the Election had gone
abroad, the cry that the land was at stake had brought in some, others
had come to see what was afoot. Many a stout tenant was here who at
other times left the marketing to his womenfolk; and shrewd glances he
cast at the gentry, as he edged past the justices who lounged before
the Audley Arms and killed in gossip the interval between the
Magistrates' Meeting, at which they had just assisted, and the
Ordinary at which they were to support young Mottisfont.

The great men talked loudly and eagerly, were passionate, were in
earnest. Occasionally one of the younger of them would step aside to
look at a passing hackney, or an older man would speak to a favorite
tenant whom he called by his first name. But, for the most part,
they clung together, fine upstanding figures, in high-collared
riding-coats and top-boots. They were keen to a man; the farmers keen
also, but not so keen. For the argument that high wheat meant high
rents, and that most of the benefits of protection went to the
landlords had got about even in Riddsley. The squires complained that
the farmers would only wake up when it was too late!

Still in such a place, and on market-day, four out of five were in the
landed interest; four-fifths of the squires, four-fifths of the
parsons, almost four-fifths of the tenants; for the laborers, no one
asked what they thought of it--they had ten shillings a week and no
votes. "Peel--'od rot him!" cried the majority, "might shift as often
as his own spinning-jenny! But not they! No Manchester man, and no
Tamworth man either, should teach them their business! Who would die
if there were no potatoes? It was a flam, a bite, but it wouldn't
bamboozle Stafford farmers!"

Meanwhile Stubbs, moving quietly through the throng, spoke with one
here and there. He had the same word for all. "Listen to me, John," he
would say, his hand on the yeoman's shoulder. "Peel says he's been
wrong all these years and is only right now. Then, if you believe him,
he's a fool; and if you don't believe him, he's a knave. Not a very
good vet., John, eh? Not the vet. for the old gray mare, eh?"

This had a great effect. John went away and repeated it to himself,
and presently grasped the dilemma and chuckled over it. Ten minutes
later he imparted it, with the air of a Solomon, to the "Duke," who
mouthed it and liked it and rolled it off to the first he met. It went
the round of the inns and about four o'clock a farmer fresh from the
"tap" put it to Stubbs and convinced him; and that night men,
travelling home market-peart in the charge of their wives, bore it to
many a snug homestead set in orchards of hard cider apples.

Had the issue of the Election lain with the Market, indeed, it had
been over. But of the hundred and ninety voters no more than fifteen
were farmers, and though the main trade of the town sided with them,
the two factories were in opposition; and cheap bread had its charms
for the lesser fry. But the free traders were too wise to flaunt their
views on market-day, and it was left for little Ben Bosham, whose vote
was pretty near his all, to distinguish himself in the matter.

He, too, had been at the tap, and about noon his voice was heard
issuing from a group who stood near the Audley Arms. "Be I free, or
bain't I?" he bawled. "Answer me that, Mr. Bagenal!"

A knot of farmers had edged him into a corner and were disposed to
bait him. A stubby figure in a velveteen coat and drab breeches, his
hand on an ash-plant, he held his ground among them, tickled by the
attention he excited and fired by his own importance. "Be I free, or
bain't I?" he repeated.

"Free?" Bagenal answered contemptuously. "You be free to make a fool
of yourself, Ben! I'm thinking you'd ha' us all lay down the ground to
lazy pasture and live by milk, as you do!"

"Milk?" ejaculated a stout man of many acres, whose contempt for such
traffic was above speech.

"You'll be free to go out of Bridge End," cried a third. "That's what
you'll be free to do! And where'll your vote be then, Ben?"

But there Bosham was sure of himself. "That's where you be wrong, Mr.
Willet," he retorted with gusto. "My vote dunno come o' my landlord,
and in the Bridge End or out of the Bridge End, I've a vote while I've
a breath! 'Tain't the landlord's vote, and why'd I give it to he? Free
I be--not like you, begging your pardon! Freeman, old freeman, I be,
of this borough! Freeman by marriage!"

"Then you be a very rare thing!" Bagenal retorted slyly. "There's a
many lose their freedom that way, but you be the first I ever heard of
that got it!"

"And a hard bargain, too, as I hear," said Willet.

This drew a roar of laughter. The crowd grew thicker and the little
man's temper grew short, for his wife was no beauty. He began to see
that they were playing with him.

"You leave me alone, Mr. Willet," he said angrily, "and I'll leave you
alone!"

"Leave thee alone!" said the farmer who had turned up his nose at
milk. "So I would, same as any other lump o' dirt! But yo' don't let
us. Yo' set up to know more than your betters! Pity the old lord ain't
alive to put his stick about your back!"

"Did it smart, Ben?" cried a lad who had poked himself in between his
betters.

"You let me catch you," Ben cried, "and I'll make you smart. You be
all a set of slaves! You'd set your thatch afire if squires'd tell
you! Set o' slaves, set o' slaves you be!"

"And what be you, Bosham?" said a man who had just joined the group.
"Head of the men, bain't you? Cheap bread and high wages, that's your
line, ain't it!"

"That's his line, be it?" said the old farmer slowly. "Bit of a rascal
it seems yo' be? Don't yo' let me find you in my boosey pasture
talking to no men o' mine, or I'll make yo' smart a sight more than
his lordship did!"

"Ay, that's Ben's line," said the new-comer.

"You're a liar!" Ben shrieked. "A dommed liar you be! I see you not
half an hour agone coming out of Stubbs's office! I know who told you
to say that, you varmint! I'll have the law of you!"

"Ben Bosham, the laborers' friend!" the man retorted.

Ben was furious, for he was frightened. There was no feud so bitter in
the 'forties as the feud between farmer and laborer. The laborer had
no vote, he had lost his common rights, his wood, his cow-feed; he was
famished, he was crushed by the new Poor Law, and so he was often in
an ugly mood, as singed barns and burning stacks went to show. Bosham
knew that he might flout the squires, and at worst be turned out of
his holding; but woe betide him if he got the name of the laborers'
friend. Moreover, there was just so much truth in the accusation as
made it dangerous. Ben and his brother eked out the profits of the
dairy by occasional labor, and Ben had sometimes vapored in tap-rooms
where he had better have held his tongue. He shrieked furiously,
therefore, at the false witness, and even tried to reach him with his
ash-plant. "Who be you?" he screamed. "You be a lawyer's pup, you be!
You'd ruin me, you would! Let me get a hold of you and I'll put a mark
on you! You be lying!"

"I don't know about that," said the big farmer slowly and weightily.
"I'm feared yo're a bit of a rascal, Ben."

"Ay, and fine he'll look in front of Stafford Gaol some morning!" said
Willet. "At the end of a rope."

On that in a happy moment for Ben, while he gaped for a retort and
found none, two carriers' vans, huge wooden vehicles festooned with
rabbits and market-baskets and drawn by three horses abreast, lumbered
through the crowd and scattered it. In a twinkling Ben was left alone,
an angry man, aware that he had cut but a poor figure!

He had been frightened, too, and he resented it. He thirsted for some
chance of setting himself right, of proving to others that he was a
freeman and not as other men. And in the nick of time he saw a
chance--if only he had the courage to rise to it. He saw moving
towards him through the press a mail-phaeton and pair. On the box,
caped and gloved, the pink of fashion, sat no less a person than his
lordship himself. A servant in the well-known livery, a white coat
with a blue collar, sat behind him.

The vans which had freed Ben blocked the great man's way, and he was
moving at a walk. All heads were bared as he passed, and he was
acknowledging the courtesy with his whip when Ben stepped before the
horses and lifted his hand. In an instant a hundred eyes were on the
man and he knew that he had burned his boats. Bravado was now his only
chance.

"My lord," he cried, waving his hat impudently. "I want to know what
you be going to do about me?"

My lord hardly caught his words and did not catch his meaning, but he
saw that the man was almost under the horses' feet and he checked
them. Ben stood aside then but, as the carriage passed him, he laid
his hand on the splashboard and walked beside it. He looked up at the
great man and in the same impudent tone, "Be you agoing to turn me
out, my lord?" he cried. "That's what I want to know."

"I don't understand you," Audley said coldly. He guessed that the man
referred to the Election, and what was the use of understrappers like
Stubbs if he was to be exposed to this?

"I'm Ben Bosham of the Bridge End, my lord, that's who I be," Ben
replied brazenly. "I'm not ashamed of my name. I want to know whether
you be agoing to turn me out, and my wife and my child! That's what I
want to----"

Then a farmer seized him and dragged him back, and others laid hands
on him, though he still shouted. "Dunno be a fool!" cried the farmer,
deeply shocked. "Drive on, drive on, my lord! Never heed him. He've
had a glass too much!"

"Packhorse beer, my lord," explained a second in stentorian
tones--though he knew that Ben was fairly sober. "Ought to be ashamed
of himself!" cried a third, and he shook the aggressor. Ben was in a
minority of one, and those who held him were inclined to be rough.

Audley waved his whip good-humoredly. "Take care of him!" he said.
"Don't hurt him!" And he drove on, outwardly unmoved though inwardly
fuming. Still had it ended there little harm would have been done. But
word of the brawl outran the carriage and, as it chanced, reached the
door of Hatton's Works as the men came out to dinner. Ben Bosham had
spoken his mind to his lordship! His lordship had driven over him! The
farmers had beaten him! The news passed from one to another like
flame, and the hands stood, some two score of them, and hooted my lord
loudly, shouting "Shame!" and jeering at him.

Now had Audley been the candidate he would have thought nothing of it.
He would have laughed in the men's faces and taken it as part of the
day's work; or had he been the old lord, he would have flung a curse
at the men and cut at the nearest with his whip--and forgotten it.

But he was not the old lord, times were changed, and the thing angered
him. It was in an ill-temper that he drove on along the road that rose
by gentle degrees to the Great Chase.

For the matter of that, he had been in a black mood for some time,
because he could not make up his mind. Night and morning ambition
whispered to him to put the vessel about; to steer the course which
experience told him that it behooved a man to steer who was not
steeped in romance, nor too greedy for the moment's enjoyment; the
course which, beyond all doubt, he would have steered were he now
starting!

But he was not starting; and when he thought of shifting the helm he
foresaw difficulties. He did not think that he was a soft-hearted man,
yet he feared that when it came to the point he would flinch. Besides,
he told himself that he was a man of honor; and the change was a
little at odds with this. But there again, he reflected that truth was
honor and in the end would cause less pain.

Eight thousand pounds was so very small a portion! And for safety, he
no longer needed to play for it. John Audley was dead and the Bible
was in his hands; his case was beyond cavil or question, while the
political situation was such that he saw no opening, no chance of
enrichment in that direction. To make Mary, handsome, good, attractive
as she was--to make her the wife of a poor peer, of a discontented,
dissatisfied man--this, if he could only find it in his heart to tell
her the truth, would be a cruel kindness.

As he drove along the road, angry with the wretched Bosham, angry with
Stubbs, angry with the fools who had hooted him, he was not sorry to
feel his ill-temper increase. He might not find it so difficult to
speak to her. A little effort and the thing would be done. Eight
thousand pounds? The interest would barely dress her. Whereas, if she
had played her cards well and been heir to her uncle's thirty
thousand--the case would have been different. After all, the fault lay
with her.

He roused the off-horse with a sharp cut, and a moment later discerned
at the end of a long, straight piece of road, the moss-clad steps of
the old Cross and standing beside them a figure he knew.

He was moved, even while, in his irritation, he was annoyed that she
had come to meet him at a place that had recollections for him. It
seemed to him that in doing this she was putting an undue, an unfair
burden on him.

She waved her hand and he raised his hat. The day was bright and cold,
and the east wind had whipped a fine color into her cheeks. Perhaps
that, too, was unfair. Perhaps that too was putting an undue burden on
him.




                            CHAPTER XXXII

                        MARY MAKES A DISCOVERY


But his face was not one to betray his thoughts, and as he drew up
beside Mary, horses fretting, polechains jingling, the silver of the
harness glittering from a score of points, he made a gallant show. The
most eager lover, Apollo himself in the chariot of the sun, had
scarcely made a better approach to his mistress, had hardly carried it
more finely over a mind open to appearances.

With a very fair show of haste he bade his man take the reins, and as
the servant swung himself into the front seat the master sprang to the
ground. His hand met Mary's, his curly-brimmed hat was doffed, his
eyes smiled into hers. "Well, better late than never!" he said.

"Yes," she answered. But she spoke more soberly than he expected and
her face was grave. "You have been a long time away."

That was their meeting. The servant was there; under his eyes it could
not be warmer. Whether one or the other had foreseen this need not be
asked.

He spoke to the man, who, possessed by a natural curiosity, was all
ears. "Keep them moving," he said. "Drive back a mile or two and
return." Then to Mary, his hat still in his hand, "A long time away?
Longer than I expected, and far longer than I hoped, Mary. Shall we go
up the hill a little?"

"I thought you would propose that," she said. "I am so glad that it is
fine."

The man had turned the horses. Audley took her hand again and pressed
it, looking in her face, telling himself that she grew more handsome
every day. Why hadn't she thirty thousand pounds? Aloud he said, "So
am I, very glad. Otherwise you could not have met me, and I fancied
that you might not wish me to come to the house? Was that so, dear?"

"I think it was," she said. "He has been gone so very short a time.
Perhaps it was foolish of me."

"Not at all!" he answered, admiring the purity of her complexion. "It
was like you."

"If we had told him, it would have been different."

"On the other hand," he said deftly, as he drew her hand through his
arm, "it might have troubled his last days? And now, tell me all,
Mary, from the beginning. You have gone through dark days and I have
not been--I could not be with you. But I want to share them."

She told the story of John Audley's disappearance, her cheeks growing
pale as she described the alarm, the search, the approach of night and
her anguish at the thought that her uncle might be lying in some place
which they had overlooked! Then she told him of Basset's arrival, of
the discovery, of the manner in which Peter had arranged everything
and saved her in every way. It seemed to her that to omit this, to say
nothing of him, would be as unfair to the one as uncandid to the
other.

My lord's comment was cordial, yet it jarred on her. "Well done!" he
said. "He was made to be of use, poor chap! If it were any one else I
should be jealous of him!" And he laughed, pressing her arm to his
side.

She was quivering with the memories which her story had called up, and
it was only by an effort that she checked the impulse to withdraw her
hand. "Had you been there----"

"I hope I should have done as much," he replied complacently. "But it
was impossible."

"Yes," she said. And though she knew that her tone was cold, she could
not help it. For many, many times during the last month she had
pondered over his long absence and the chill of his letters. Many
times she had told herself that he was treating her with scant
affection, scant confidence, almost with scant respect. But then again
she had reflected that she must be mistaken, that she brought him
nothing but herself, and that if he did not love her he would not have
sought her. And telling herself that she expected too much of love,
too much of her lover, she had schooled herself to be patient, and had
resolved that not a word of complaint should pass her lips.

But to assume a warmth which she did not feel was another matter. This
was beyond her.

He, for his part, set down her manner to a natural depression. "Poor
child!" he said, "you have had a sad time. Well, we must make up for
it. As soon as we can make arrangements you must leave that gloomy
house where everything reminds you of your uncle and--and we must make
a fresh start. Do you know where I am taking you?"

She saw that they had turned off the road and were following a track
that scrambled upwards through the scrub that clothed the slope below
the Gatehouse. It slanted in the direction of the Great House. "Not to
Beaudelays?" she said.

"Yes--to Beaudelays. But don't be afraid. Not to the house."

"Oh no!" she cried. "I don't think I could bear to go there to-day!"

"I know. But I want you to see the gardens. I want you to see what
might have been ours, what we might have enjoyed had fortune been more
kind to us! Had we been rich, Mary! It is hard to believe that you
have never seen even the outside of the Great House."

"I have never been beyond the Iron Gate."

"And all these months within a mile!"

"All these months within a mile. But he did not wish it. It was one of
the first things he made me understand."

"Ah! Well, there is an end of that!" And again so matter-of-fact was
his tone that she had to struggle against the impulse to withdraw her
arm. "Now, if there is any one who has a right to be there, it is you!
And I want to be the one to take you there. I want you to see for
yourself that it is only fallen grandeur that you are marrying, Mary,
the thing that has been, not the thing that is. By G--d! I don't know
that there is a creature in the world--certainly there is none in my
world--more to be pitied than a poor peer!"

"That's nothing to me," she said. And, indeed, his words had brought
him nearer to her than anything he had said. So that when, taking
advantage of the undergrowth which hid them from the road below, he
put his arm about her and assisted her in her climb, she yielded
readily. "To think," he said, "that you have never seen this place! I
wonder that after we parted you did not go the very next morning to
visit it!"

"Perhaps I wished to be taken there by you."

"By Jove! Do you know that that is the most lover-like thing you have
said."

"I may improve with practice," she rejoined. "Indeed, it is possible,"
she continued demurely, "that we both need practice!"

She had not a notion that he was in two minds; that one half of him
was revelling in the hour, pleased with possession, enjoying her
beauty, dwelling on the dainty curves of her figure, while the other
uncertain, wavering, was asking continually, "Shall I or shall I not?"
But if she did not guess thoughts to which she had no clue he was
sharp enough to understand hers. "Ah! you are there, are you?" he
said. "Wait! Presently, when we are out of sight of that cursed
road----"

"I didn't find fault!"

On that there was a little banter between them, gallant and smiling on
his part, playful and defensive on hers, which lasted until they
reached a door leading into the lower garden. It was a rusty,
damp-stained door, once painted green, and masked by trees somewhat
higher than the underwood through which they had climbed. Ivy hung
from the wall above it, rank grass grew against it, the air about
it was dank, and in summer sent up the smell of wild leeks. Once
under-gardeners had used it to come and go, and many a time on moonlit
nights maids had stolen through it to meet their lovers in the coppice
or on the road.

Audley had brought the key and he set it in the lock and turned it.
But he did not open the door. Instead, he turned to Mary with a smile.
"This is my surprise," he said. "Shut your eyes and open them when I
tell you. I will guide you."

She complied without suspicion, and heard the door squeak on its rusty
hinges. Guided by his hand she advanced three or four paces. She heard
the door close behind her. He put his arm round her and drew her on.
"Now?" she asked, "May I look?"

"Yes, now!" he answered. As he spoke he drew her to him, and, before
she knew what to expect, he had crushed her to his breast and was
pressing kisses on her face and lips.

She was taken by surprise and so completely, that for a moment she was
helpless, without defence. Then the instinctive impulse to resist
overcame her, and she struggled fiercely; and, presently, she released
herself. "Oh, you shouldn't have done it!" she cried. "You shouldn't
have done it!"

"My darling!"

"You--you hurt me!" she panted, her breath coming short and quick. She
was as red now as she had for a moment been white. Her lips trembled,
and there were tears in her eyes. He thought that he had been too
rough with her, and though he did not understand, he stayed his
impulse to seize her again. Instead, he stood looking down at her, a
little put out.

She tried to smile, tried bravely to pass it off; but she was put to
it, he could see, not to burst into tears. "Perhaps I am foolish," she
faltered, "but please don't do it again."

"I can't promise--for always," he answered, smiling. But, none
the less, he was piqued. What a prude the girl was! What a
Sainte-ni-touche! To make such a fuss about a few kisses!

She tried to take the same tone. "I know I am silly," she said, "but
you took me by surprise."

"You were very innocent, then, my dear. Still, I'll be good, and next
time I will give you warning. Now, don't be afraid, take my arm, and
let us----"

"If I could sit down?" she murmured. Then he saw that the color had
again left her cheeks.

There was an old wheelbarrow inside the door, half full of dead
leaves. He swept it clear, and she sat down on the edge of it. He
stood by her, puzzled, and at a loss.

Certainly he had played a trick on her, and he had been a little rough
because he had felt her impulse to resist. But she must have known
that he would kiss her sooner or later. And she was no child. Her
convent days were not of yesterday. She was a woman. He did not
understand it.

Alas, she did understand it. It was not her lover's kisses, it was not
his passion or his roughness that had shaken Mary. She was not a prude
and she was a woman. That which had overwhelmed her was the knowledge,
the certainty forced on her by his embrace, that she did not love him!
That, however much she might have deluded herself a few weeks earlier,
however far she might have let the lure of love mislead her, she did
not love this man! And she was betrothed to him, she was promised to
him, she was his! On her engagement to him, on her future with him had
been based--a moment before--all her plans and all her hopes for the
future.

No wonder that the color was struck from her face, that she was shaken
to the depths of her being. For, indeed, she knew something more--that
she had had her warning and had closed her eyes to it. That evening,
when she had heard Basset's step come through the hall, that moment
when his presence had lifted the burden of suspense from her, should
have made her wise. And for an instant the veil had been lifted, and
she had been alarmed. But she reflected that the passing doubt was due
to her lover's absence and his coldness; and she had put the doubt
from her. When Audley returned all would be well, she would feel as
before. She was hipped and lonely and the other was kind to her--that
was all!

Now she knew that that was not all. She did not love Audley and she
did love some one else. And it was too late. She had misled herself,
she had misled the man who loved her, she had misled that other whom
she loved. And it was too late!

For a time that was short, yet seemed long to her companion, who stood
watching her, she sat lost in thought and unconscious of his presence.
At length he could bear it no longer. Pale cheeks and dull eyes had no
charm for him! He had not come, he had not met her, for this.

"Come!" he said, "come, Mary, you will catch cold sitting there! One
might suppose I was an ogre!"

She smiled wanly. "Oh no!" she said, "It is I--who am foolish. Please
forgive me."

"If you would like to go back?"

But her ear detected temper in his tone, and with a newborn fear of
him she hastened to appease him. "Oh no!" she said. "You were going to
show me the gardens!"

"Such as they are. Well, so you will see what there is to be seen. It
is a sorry sight, I can tell you." She rose and, taking her arm, he
led her some fifty yards along the alley in which they were, then,
turning to the right, he stopped. "There," he said. "What do you think
of it?"

They had before them the long, dank, weed-grown walk, broken midway by
the cracked fountain and closed at the far end by the broad flight of
broken steps that led upward to the terrace and so to the great lawn.
When Audley had last stood on this spot the luxuriance of autumn had
clothed the neglected beds. A tangle of vegetation, covering every
foot of soil with leaf and bloom, had veiled the progress of neglect.
Now, as by magic, all was changed. The sun still shone, but coldly and
on a bald scene. The roses that had run riot, the spires of hollyhocks
that had risen above them, the sunflowers that had struggled with the
encroaching elder, nay, the very bindweed that had strangled all alike
in its green embrace, were gone, or only reared naked stems to the
cold sky. Gone, too, were the Old Man, the Sweet William, the St.
John's Wort, the wilderness of humbler growths that had pressed about
their feet; and from the bare earth and leafless branches, the
fountain and the sundial alone, like mourners over fallen grandeur,
lifted gray heads.

There is no garden that has not its sad season, its days of stillness
and mourning, but this garden was sordid as well as sad. Its dead lay
unburied.

Involuntarily Mary spoke. "Oh, it is terrible!" she cried.

"It is terrible," he answered gloomily.

Then she feared that, preoccupied as she was with other thoughts, she
had hurt him. She was trying to think of something to comfort him,
when he repeated, "It is terrible! But, d--n it, let us see the rest
of it! We've come here for that! Let us see it!"

Together they went slowly along the walk. They came by and by to the
sundial. She hung a moment, wishing to read the inscription, but he
would not stay. "It's the old story," he said. "We are gay fellows in
the sunshine, but in the shadow--we are moths."

He did not explain his meaning. He drew her on. They mounted the wide
flight which had once, flanked by urns and nymphs and hot with summer
sunshine, echoed the tread of red-heeled shoes and the ring of spurs.
Now, elder grew between the shattered steps, weeds clothed them, the
nymphs mouldered, lacking arms and heads, the urns gaped.

Mary felt his depression and would have comforted him, but her brain
was numbed by the discovery which she had made; she was unable to
think, without power to help. She shared, she more than shared, his
depression. And it was not until they had surmounted the last flight
and stood gazing on the Great House that she found her voice. Then, as
the length and vastness of the pile broke upon her, she caught her
breath. "Oh," she cried. "It is immense!"

"It's a nightmare," he replied. "That is Beaudelays! That is," with
bitterness, "the splendid seat of Philip, fourteenth Lord Audley--and
a millstone about his neck! It is well, my dear, that you should see
it! It is well that you should know what is before you! You see your
home! And what you are marrying--if you think it worth while!"

If she had loved him she would have been strong to comfort him. If she
had even fancied that she loved him, she would have known what to
answer. As it was, she was dumb; she scarcely took in the significance
of his words. Her mind--so much of it as she could divert from
herself--was engaged with the sight before her, with the long rows of
blank and boarded windows, the smokeless chimneys, the raw, unfinished
air that, after eighty years, betrayed that this had never been a
home, had never opened its doors to happy brides, nor heard the voices
of children.

At last she spoke. "And this is Beaudelays?" she said.

"This is my home," he replied. "That's the place I've come to own!
It's a pleasant possession! It promises a cheerful homecoming, doesn't
it?"

"Have you never thought of--of doing anything to it?" she asked
timidly.

"Do you mean--have I thought of completing it? Of repairing it?"

"I suppose I meant that," she replied.

"I might as well think," he retorted, "of repairing the Tower of
London! All I have in the world wouldn't do it! And I cannot pull it
down. If I did, the lawyers first and the housebreakers afterwards,
would pull down all I have with it! There is no escape, my dear," he
continued slowly. "Once I thought there was. I had my dream. I've
stood on this lawn on summer days and I've told myself that I would
build it up again, and that the name of Audley should not be lost. But
I am a peer, what can I do? I cannot trade, I cannot plead. For a peer
there is but one way--marriage. And there were times when I had
visions of repairing the breach--in that way; when I thought that I
could set the old name first and my pleasure second; when I dreamed of
marrying a great dowry that should restore us to the place we once
enjoyed. But--that is over! That is over," he repeated in a sinking
voice. "I had to choose between prosperity and happiness; I made my
choice. God grant that we may never repent it!"

He sank into silence, waiting for her to speak; he waited with
exasperation. She did not, and he looked down at her. Then, "I
believe," he said, "that you have not heard a word I have said!"

