
Konstantin made haste to change the conversation.

"Do you know your little Vanya's with me, a clerk in the
countinghouse at Pokrovskoe."

Nikolay jerked his neck, and sank into thought.

"Yes, tell me what's going on at Pokrovskoe.  Is the house
standing still, and the birch trees, and our schoolroom? And
Philip the gardener, is he living? How I remember the arbor and
the seat!  Now mind and don't alter anything in the house, but
make haste and get married, and make everything as it used to be
again.  Then I'll come and see you, if your wife is nice."

"But come to me now," said Levin.  "How nicely we would arrange
it!"

"I'd come and see you if I were sure I should not find Sergey
Ivanovitch."

"You wouldn't find him there.  I live quite independently of
him."

"Yes, but say what you like, you will have to choose between me
and him," he said, looking timidly into his brother's face.

This timidity touched Konstantin.

"If you want to hear my confession of faith on the subject, I
tell you that in your quarrel with Sergey Ivanovitch I take
neither side.  You're both wrong.  You're more wrong externally,
and he inwardly."

"Ah, ah!  You see that, you see that!"  Nikolay shouted joyfully.

"But I personally value friendly relations with you more
because..."

"Why, why?"

Konstantin could not say that he valued it more because Nikolay
was unhappy, and needed affection.  But Nikolay knew that this
was just what he meant to say, and scowling he took up the vodka
again.

"Enough, Nikolay Dmitrievitch!" said Marya Nikolaevna, stretching
out her plump, bare arm towards the decanter.

"Let it be!  Don't insist!  I'll beat you!" he shouted.

Marya Nikolaevna smiled a sweet and good-humored smile, which was
at once reflected on Nikolay's face, and she took the bottle.

"And do you suppose she understands nothing?" said Nikolay.  "She
understands it all better than any of us.  Isn't it true there's
something good and sweet in her?"

"Were you never before in Moscow?" Konstantin said to her, for
the sake of saying something.

"Only you mustn't be polite and stiff with her.  It frightens
her.  No one ever spoke to her so but the justices of the peace
who tried her for trying to get out of a house of ill-fame.
Mercy on us, the senselessness in the world!" he cried suddenly.
"These new institutions, these justices of the peace, rural
councils, what hideousness it all is!"

And he began to enlarge on his encounters with the new
institutions.

Konstantin Levin heard him, and the disbelief in the sense of
all public institutions, which he shared with him, and often
expressed, was distasteful to him now from his brother's lips.

"In another world we shall understand it all," he said lightly.

"In another world!  Ah, I don't like that other world!  I don't
like it," he said, letting his scared eyes rest on his brother's
eyes.  "Here one would think that to get out of all the baseness
and the mess, one's own and other people's, would be a good
thing, and yet I'm afraid of death, awfully afraid of death." He
shuddered.  "But do drink something.  Would you like some
champagne?  Or shall we go somewhere?  Let's go to the Gypsies!
Do you know I have got so fond of the Gypsies and Russian songs."

His speech had begun to falter, and he passed abruptly from one
subject to another.  Konstantin with the help of Masha persuaded
him not to go out anywhere, and got him to bed hopelessly drunk.

Masha promised to write to Konstantin in case of need, and to
persuade Nikolay Levin to go and stay with his brother.



Chapter 26


In the morning Konstantin Levin left Moscow, and towards evening
he reached home.  On the journey in the train he talked to his
neighbors about politics and the new railways, and, just as in
Moscow, he was overcome by a sense of confusion of ideas,
dissatisfaction with himself, shame of something or other.  But
when he got out at his own station, when he saw his one-eyed
coachman, Ignat, with the collar of his coat turned up; when, in
the dim light reflected by the station fires, he saw his own
sledge, his own horses with their tails tied up, in their harness
trimmed with rings and tassels; when the coachman Ignat, as he
put in his luggage, told him the village news, that the
contractor had arrived, and that Pava had calved,--he felt that
little by little the confusion was clearing up, and the shame and
self-dissatisfaction were passing away.  He felt this at the mere
sight of Ignat and the horses; but when he had put on the
sheepskin brought for him, had sat down wrapped up in the sledge,
and had driven off pondering on the work that lay before him in
the village, and staring at the side-horse, that had been his
saddle-horse, past his prime now, but a spirited beast from the
Don, he began to see what had happened to him in quite a
different light.  He felt himself, and did not want to be any one
else.  All he wanted now was to be better than before.  In the
first place he resolved that from that day he would give up
hoping for any extraordinary happiness, such as marriage must
have given him, and consequently he would not so disdain what he
really had.  Secondly, he would never again let himself give way
to low passion, the memory of which had so tortured him when he
had been making up his mind to make an offer.  Then remembering
his brother Nikolay, he resolved to himself that he would never
allow himself to forget him, that he would follow him up, and not
lose sight of him, so as to be ready to help when things should
go ill with him.  And that would be soon, he felt.  Then, too,
his brother's talk of communism, which he had treated so lightly
at the time, now made him think.  He considered a revolution in
economic conditions nonsense.  But he always felt the injustice
of his own abundance in comparison with the poverty of the
peasants, and now he determined that so as to feel quite in the
right, though he had worked hard and lived by no means
luxuriously before, he would now work still harder, and would
allow himself even less luxury.  And all this seemed to him so
easy a conquest over himself that he spent the whole drive in the
pleasantest daydreams.  With a resolute feeling of hope in a new,
better life, he reached home before nine o'clock at night.

The snow of the little quadrangle before the house was lit up by
a light in the bedroom windows of his old nurse, Agafea
Mihalovna, who performed the duties of housekeeper in his house.
She was not yet asleep.  Kouzma, waked up by her, came sidling
sleepily out onto the steps.  A setter bitch, Laska, ran out too,
almost upsetting Kouzma, and whining, turned round about Levin's
knees, jumping up and longing, but not daring, to put her
forepaws on his chest.

"You're soon back again, sir," said Agafea Mihalovna.

"I got tired of it, Agafea Mihalovna.  With friends, one is well;
but at home, one is better," he answered, and went into his
study.

The study was slowly lit up as the candle was brought in.  The
familiar details came out: the stag's horns, the bookshelves,
the looking-glass, the stove with its ventilator, which had long
wanted mending, his father's sofa, a large table, on the table an
open book, a broken ash tray, a manuscript book with his
handwriting.  As he saw all this, there came over him for an
instant a doubt of the possibility of arranging the new life, of
which he had been dreaming on the road.  All these traces of his
life seemed to clutch him, and to say to him: "No, you're not
going to get away from us, and you're not going to be different,
but you're going to be the same as you've always been; with
doubts, everlasting dissatisfaction with yourself, vain efforts
to amend, and falls, and everlasting expectation, of a happiness
which you won't get, and which isn't possible for you."

This the things said to him, but another voice in his heart was
telling him that he must not fall under the sway of the past, and
that one can do anything with oneself.  And hearing that voice,
he went into the corner where stood his two heavy dumbbells, and
began brandishing them like a gymnast, trying to restore his
confident temper.  There was a creak of steps at the door.  He
hastily put down the dumbbells.

The bailiff came in, and said everything, thank God, was doing
well; but informed him that the buckwheat in the new drying
machine had been a little scorched.  This piece of news irritated
Levin.  The new drying machine had been constructed and partly
invented by Levin.  The bailiff had always been against the
drying machine, and now it was with suppressed triumph that he
announced that the buckwheat had been scorched.  Levin was firmly
convinced that if the buckwheat had been scorched, it was only
because the precautions had not been taken, for which he had
hundreds of times given orders.  He was annoyed, and reprimanded
the bailiff.  But there had been an important and joyful event:
Pava, his best cow, an expensive beast, bought at a show, had
calved.

"Kouzma, give me my sheepskin.  And you tell them to take a
lantern.  I'll come and look at her," he said to the bailiff.

The cowhouse for the more valuable cows was just behind the
house.  Walking across the yard, passing a snowdrift by the lilac
tree, he went into the cowhouse.  There was the warm, steamy
smell of dung when the frozen door was opened, and the cows,
astonished at the unfamiliar light of the lantern, stirred on the
fresh straw.  He caught a glimpse of the broad, smooth, black and
piebald back of Hollandka.  Berkoot, the bull, was lying down
with his ring in his lip, and seemed about to get up, but thought
better of it, and only gave two snorts as they passed by him.
Pava, a perfect beauty, huge as a hippopotamus, with her back
turned to them, prevented their seeing the calf, as she sniffed
her all over.

Levin went into the pen, looked Pava over, and lifted the red and
spotted calf onto her long, tottering legs.  Pava, uneasy, began
lowing, but when Levin put the calf close to her she was soothed,
and, sighing heavily, began licking her with her rough tongue.
The calf, fumbling, poked her nose under her mother's udder, and
stiffened her tail out straight.

"Here, bring the light, Fyodor, this way," said Levin, examining
the calf.  "Like the mother! though the color takes after the
father; but that's nothing.  Very good.  Long and broad in the
haunch.  Vassily Fedorovitch, isn't she splendid?" he said to the
bailiff, quite forgiving him for the buckwheat under the
influence of his delight in the calf.

"How could she fail to be?  Oh, Semyon the contractor came the
day after you left.  You must settle with him, Konstantin
Dmitrievitch," said the bailiff.  "I did inform you about the
machine."

This question was enough to take Levin back to all the details of
his work on the estate, which was on a large scale, and
complicated.  He went straight from the cowhouse to the counting
house, and after a little conversation with the bailiff and
Semyon the contractor, he went back to the house and straight
upstairs to the drawing room.



Chapter 27


The house was big and old-fashioned, and Levin, though he lived
alone, had the whole house heated and used.  He knew that this
was stupid, he knew that it was positively not right, and
contrary to his present new plans, but this house was a whole
world to Levin.  It was the world in which his father and mother
had lived and died.  They had lived just the life that to Levin
seemed the ideal of perfection, and that he had dreamed of
beginning with his wife, his family.

Levin scarcely remembered his mother.  His conception of her was
for him a sacred memory, and his future wife was bound to be in
his imagination a repetition of that exquisite, holy ideal of a
woman that his mother had been.

He was so far from conceiving of love for woman apart from
marriage that he positively pictured to himself first the family,
and only secondarily the woman who would give him a family.  His
ideas of marriage were, consequently, quite unlike those of the
great majority of his acquaintances, for whom getting married was
one of the numerous facts of social life.  For Levin it was the
chief affair of life, on which its whole happiness turned.  And
now he had to give up that.

When he had gone into the little drawing room, where he always
had tea, and had settled himself in his armchair with a book,
and Agafea Mihalovna had brought him tea, and with her usual,
"Well, I'll stay a while, sir," had taken a chair in the window,
he felt that, however strange it might be, he had not parted from
his daydreams, and that he could not live without them.  Whether
with her, or with another, still it would be.  He was reading a
book, and thinking of what he was reading, and stopping to listen
to Agafea Mihalovna, who gossiped away without flagging, and yet
with all that, all sorts of pictures of family life and work in
the future rose disconnectedly before his imagination.  He felt
that in the depth of his soul something had been put in its
place, settled down, and laid to rest.

He heard Agafea Mihalovna talking of how Prohor had forgotten his
duty to God, and with the money Levin had given him to buy a
horse, had been drinking without stopping, and had beaten his
wife till he'd half killed her.  He listened, and read his book,
and recalled the whole train of ideas suggested by his reading.
It was Tyndall's _Treatise on Heat_.  He recalled his own
criticisms of Tyndall of his complacent satisfaction in the
cleverness of his experiments, and for his lack of philosophic
insight.  And suddenly there floated into his mind the joyful
thought: "In two years' time I shall have two Dutch cows; Pava
herself will perhaps still be alive, a dozen young daughters of
Berkoot and the three others--how lovely!"

He took up his book again.  "Very good, electricity and heat are
the same thing; but is it possible to substitute the one quantity
for the other in the equation for the solution of any problem?
No.  Well, then what of it?  The connection between all the
forces of nature is felt instinctively....  It's particulary nice
if Pava's daughter should be a red-spotted cow, and all the herd
will take after her, and the other three, too!  Splendid!  To go
out with my wife and visitors to meet the herd....  My wife says,
Kostya and I looked after that calf like a child.'  'How can it
interest you so much?' says a visitor.  'Everything that
interests him, interests me.'  But who will she be?"  And he
remembered what had happened at Moscow....  "Well, there's
nothing to be done....  It's not my fault.  But now everything
shall go on in a new way.  It's nonsense to pretend that life
won't let one, that the past won't let one.  One must struggle to
live better, much better."...  He raised his head, and fell to
dreaming.  Old Laska, who had not yet fully digested her delight
at his return, and had run out into the yard to bark, came back
wagging her tail, and crept up to him, bringing in the scent of
fresh air, put her head under his hand, and whined plaintively,
asking to be stroked.

"There, who'd have thought it?" said Agafea Mihalovna.  "The dog
now...why, she understands that her master's come home, and that
he's low-spirited."

"Why low-spirited?"

"Do you suppose I don't see it, sir? It's high time I should know
the gentry.  Why, I've grown up from a little thing with them.
It's nothing, sir, so long as there's health and a clear
conscience."

Levin looked intently at her, surprised at how well she knew his
thought.

"Shall I fetch you another cup?" said she, and taking his cup she
went out.

Laska kept poking her head under his hand.  He stroked her, and
she promptly curled up at his feet, laying her head on a hindpaw.
And in token of all now being well and satisfactory, she opened
her mouth a little, smacked her lips, and settling her sticky
lips more comfortably about her old teeth, she sank into blissful
repose.  Levin watched all her movements attentively.

"That's what I'll do," he said to himself; "that's what I'll do!
Nothing's amiss....  All's well."



Chapter 28


After the ball, early next morning, Anna Arkadyevna sent her
husband a telegram that she was leaving Moscow the same day.

"No, I must go, I must go"; she explained to her sister-in-law
the change in her plans in a tone that suggested that she had to
remember so many things that there was no enumerating them: "no,
it had really better be today!"

Stepan Arkadyevitch was not dining at home, but he promised to
come and see his sister off at seven o'clock.

Kitty, too, did not come, sending a note that she had a headache.
Dolly and Anna dined alone with the children and the English
governess.  Whether it was that the children were fickle, or that
they had acute senses, and felt that Anna was quite different
that day from what she had been when they had taken such a fancy
to her, that she was not now interested in them,--but they had
abruptly dropped their play with their aunt, and their love for
her, and were quite indifferent that she was going away.  Anna
was absorbed the whole morning in preparations for her
departure.  She wrote notes to her Moscow acquaintances, put down
her accounts, and packed.  Altogether Dolly fancied she was not
in a placid state of mind, but in that worried mood, which Dolly
knew well with herself, and which does not come without cause,
and for the most part covers dissatisfaction with self.  After
dinner, Anna went up to her room to dress, and Dolly followed
her.

"How queer you are today!" Dolly said to her.

"I? Do you think so? I'm not queer, but I'm nasty.  I am like
that sometimes.  I keep feeling as if I could cry.  It's very
stupid, but it'll pass off," said Anna quickly, and she bent her
flushed face over a tiny bag in which she was packing a nightcap
and some cambric handkerchiefs.  Her eyes were particularly
bright, and were continually swimming with tears.  "In the same
way I didn't want to leave Petersburg, and now I don't want to go
away from here."

"You came here and did a good deed," said Dolly, looking intently
at her.

Anna looked at her with eyes wet with tears.

"Don't say that, Dolly.  I've done nothing, and could do nothing.
I often wonder why people are all in league to spoil me.  What
have I done, and what could I do? In your heart there was found
love enough to forgive..."

"If it had not been for you, God knows what would have happened!
How happy you are, Anna!" said Dolly.  "Everything is clear and
good in your heart."

"Every heart has its own _skeletons_, as the English say."

"You have no sort of _skeleton_, have you? Everything is so clear
in you."

"I have!" said Anna suddenly, and, unexpectedly after her tears,
a sly, ironical smile curved her lips.

"Come, he's amusing, anyway, your _skeleton_, and not depressing,"
said Dolly, smiling.

"No, he's depressing.  Do you know why I'm going today instead of
tomorrow? It's a confession that weighs on me; I want to make it
to you," said Anna, letting herself drop definitely into an
armchair, and looking straight into Dolly's face.

And to her surprise Dolly saw that Anna was blushing up to her
ears, up to the curly black ringlets on her neck.

"Yes," Anna went on.  "Do you know why Kitty didn't come to
dinner?  She's jealous of me.  I have spoiled...I've been the
cause of that ball being a torture to her instead of a pleasure.
But truly, truly, it's not my fault, or only my fault a little
bit," she said, daintily drawling the words "a little bit."

"Oh, how like Stiva you said that!" said Dolly, laughing.

Anna was hurt.

"Oh no, oh no!  I'm not Stiva," she said, knitting her brows.
"That's why I'm telling you, just because I could never let
myself doubt myself for an instant," said Anna.

But at the very moment she was uttering the words, she felt that
they were not true.  She was not merely doubting herself, she
felt emotion at the thought of Vronsky, and was going away sooner
than she had meant, simply to avoid meeting him.

"Yes, Stiva told me you danced the mazurka with him, and that
he..."

"You can't imagine how absurdly it all came about.  I only meant
to be matchmaking, and all at once it turned out quite
differently.  Possibly against my own will..."

She crimsoned and stopped.

"Oh, they feel it directly?" said Dolly.

"But I should be in despair if there were anything serious in it
on his side," Anna interrupted her.  "And I am certain it will
all be forgotten, and Kitty will leave off hating me."

"All the same, Anna, to tell you the truth, I'm not very anxious
for this marriage for Kitty.  And it's better it should come to
nothing, if he, Vronsky, is capable of falling in love with you
in a single day."

"Oh, heavens, that would be too silly!" said Anna, and again a
deep flush of pleasure came out on her face, when she heard the
idea, that absorbed her, put into words.  "And so here I am going
away, having made an enemy of Kitty, whom I liked so much!  Ah,
how sweet she is! But you'll make it right, Dolly? Eh?"

Dolly could scarcely suppress a smile.  She loved Anna, but she
enjoyed seeing that she too had her weaknesses.

"An enemy? That can't be."

"I did so want you all to care for me, as I do for you, and now I
care for you more than ever," said Anna, with tears in her eyes.
"Ah, how silly I am today!"

She passed her handkerchief over her face and began dressing.

At the very moment of starting Stepan Arkadyevitch arrived, late,
rosy and good-humored, smelling of wine and cigars.

Anna's emotionalism infected Dolly, and when she embraced her
sister-in-law for the last time, she whispered: "Remember, Anna,
what you've done for me--I shall never forget.  And remember
that I love you, and shall always love you as my dearest friend!"

"I don't know why," said Anna, kissing her and hiding her tears.

"You understood me, and you understand.  Good-bye, my darling!"



Chapter 29


"Come, it's all over, and thank God!" was the first thought that
came to Anna Arkadyevna, when she had said good-bye for the last
time to her brother, who had stood blocking up the entrance to
the carriage till the third bell rang.  She sat down on her
lounge beside Annushka, and looked about her in the twilight of
the sleeping-carriage.  "Thank God! tomorrow I shall see Seryozha
and Alexey Alexandrovitch, and my life will go on in the old way,
all nice and as usual."

Still in the same anxious frame of mind, as she had been all that
day, Anna took pleasure in arranging herself for the journey with
great care.  With her little deft hands she opened and shut her
little red bag, took out a cushion, laid it on her knees, and
carefully wrapping up her feet, settled herself comfortably.  An
invalid lady had already lain down to sleep.  Two other ladies
began talking to Anna, and a stout elderly lady tucked up her
feet, and made observations about the heating of the train.  Anna
answered a few words, but not foreseeing any entertainment from
the conversation, she asked Annushka to get a lamp, hooked it
onto the arm of her seat, and took from her bag a paper knife and
an English novel.  At first her reading made no progress.  The
fuss and bustle were disturbing; then when the train had started,
she could not help listening to the noises; then the snow beating
on the left window and sticking to the pane, and the sight of the
muffled guard passing by, covered with snow on one side, and the
conversations about the terrible snowstorm raging outside,
distracted her attention.  Farther on, it was continually the
same again and again: the same shaking and rattling, the same
snow on the window, the same rapid transitions from steaming
heat to cold, and back again to heat, the same passing glimpses
of the same figures in the twilight, and the same voices, and
Anna began to read and to understand what she read.  Annushka was
already dozing, the red bag on her lap, clutched by her broad
hands, in gloves, of which one was torn.  Anna Arkadyevna read
and understood, but it was distasteful to her to read, that is,
to follow the reflection of other people's lives.  She had too
great a desire to live herself.  If she read that the heroine of
the novel was nursing a sick man, she longed to move with
noiseless steps about the room of a sick man; if she read of a
member of Parliament making a speech, she longed to be delivering
the speech; if she read of how Lady Mary had ridden after the
hounds, and had provoked her sister-in-law, and had surprised
everyone by her boldness, she too wished to be doing the same.
But there was no chance of doing anything; and twisting the
smooth paper knife in her little hands, she forced herself to
read.

The hero of the novel was already almost reaching his English
happiness, a baronetcy and an estate, and Anna was feeling a
desire to go with him to the estate, when she suddenly felt that
_he_ ought to feel ashamed, and that she was ashamed of the same
thing.  But what had he to be ashamed of?  "What have I to be
ashamed of?" she asked herself in injured surprise.  She laid
down the book and sank against the back of the chair, tightly
gripping the paper cutter in both hands.  There was nothing.  She
went over all her Moscow recollections.  All were good, pleasant.
She remembered the ball, remembered Vronsky and his face of
slavish adoration, remembered all her conduct with him: there
was nothing shameful.  And for all that, at the same point in her
memories, the feeling of shame was intensified, as though some
inner voice, just at the point when she thought of Vronsky, were
saying to her, "Warm, very warm, hot."  "Well, what is it?" she
said to herself resolutely, shifting her seat in the lounge.
"What does it mean?  Am I afraid to look it straight in the face?
Why, what is it?  Can it be that between me and this officer boy
there exist, or can exist, any other relations than such as are
common with every acquaintance?"  She laughed contemptuously and
took up her book again; but now she was definitely unable to
follow what she read.  She passed the paper knife over the window
pane, then laid its smooth, cool surface to her cheek, and almost
laughed aloud at the feeling of delight that all at once without
cause came over her.  She felt as though her nerves were strings
being strained tighter and tighter on some sort of screwing peg.
She felt her eyes opening wider and wider, her fingers and toes
twitching nervously, something within oppressing her breathing,
while all shapes and sounds seemed in the uncertain half-light to
strike her with unaccustomed vividness.  Moments of doubt were
continually coming upon her, when she was uncertain whether the
train were going forwards or backwards, or were standing still
altogether; whether it were Annushka at her side or a stranger.
"What's that on the arm of the chair, a fur cloak or some beast?
And what am I myself?  Myself or some other woman?"  She was
afraid of giving way to this delirium.  But something drew her
towards it, and she could yield to it or resist it at will.  She
got up to rouse herself, and slipped off her plaid and the cape
of her warm dress.  For a moment she regained her
self-possession, and realized that the thin peasant who had come
in wearing a long overcoat, with buttons missing from it, was the
stoveheater, that he was looking at the thermometer, that it was
the wind and snow bursting in after him at the door; but then
everything grew blurred again....  That peasant with the long
waist seemed to be gnawing something on the wall, the old lady
began stretching her legs the whole length of the carriage, and
filling it with a black cloud; then there was a fearful shrieking
and banging, as though someone were being torn to pieces; then
there was a blinding dazzle of red fire before her eyes and a
wall seemed to rise up and hide everything.  Anna felt as though
she were sinking down.  But it was not terrible, but delightful.
The voice of a man muffled up and covered with snow shouted
something in her ear.  She got up and pulled herself together;
she realized that they had reached a station and that this was
the guard.  She asked Annushka to hand her the cape she had taken
off and her shawl, put them on and moved towards the door.

"Do you wish to get out?" asked Annushka.

"Yes, I want a little air.  It's very hot in here." And she
opened the door.  The driving snow and the wind rushed to meet
her and struggled with her over the door.  But she enjoyed the
struggle.

She opened the door and went out.  The wind seemed as though
lying in wait for her; with gleeful whistle it tried to snatch
her up and bear her off, but she clung to the cold door post, and
holding her skirt got down onto the platform and under the
shelter of the carriages.  The wind had been powerful on the
steps, but on the platform, under the lee of the carriages, there
was a lull.  With enjoyment she drew deep breaths of the frozen,
snowy air, and standing near the carriage looked about the
platform and the lighted station.



Chapter 30


The raging tempest rushed whistling between the wheels of the
carriages, about the scaffolding, and round the corner of the
station.  The carriages, posts, people, everything that was to be
seen was covered with snow on one side, and was getting more and
more thickly covered.  For a moment there would come a lull in
the storm, but then it would swoop down again with such
onslaughts that it seemed impossible to stand against it.
Meanwhile men ran to and fro, talking merrily together, their
steps crackling on the platform as they continually opened and
closed the big doors.  The bent shadow of a man glided by at her
feet, and she heard sounds of a hammer upon iron.  "Hand over
that telegram!" came an angry voice out of the stormy darkness on
the other side.  "This way!  No.  28!" several different voices
shouted again, and muffled figures ran by covered with snow.  Two
gentlemen with lighted cigarettes passed by her.  She drew one
more deep breath of the fresh air, and had just put her hand out
of her muff to take hold of the door post and get back into the
carriage, when another man in a military overcoat, quite close
beside her, stepped between her and the flickering light of the
lamp post.  She looked round, and the same instant recognized
Vronsky's face.  Putting his hand to the peak of his cap, he
bowed to her and asked, Was there anything she wanted?  Could he
be of any service to her?  She gazed rather a long while at him
without answering, and, in spite of the shadow in which he was
standing, she saw, or fancied she saw, both the expression of his
face and his eyes.  It was again that expression of reverential
ecstasy which had so worked upon her the day before.  More than
once she had told herself during the past few days, and again
only a few moments before, that Vronsky was for her only one of
the hundreds of young men, forever exactly the same, that are met
everywhere, that she would never allow herself to bestow a
thought upon him.  But now at the first instant of meeting him,
she was seized by a feeling of joyful pride.  She had no need to
ask why he had come.  She knew as certainly as if he had told her
that he was here to be where she was.

"I didn't know you were going.  What are you coming for?" she
said, letting fall the hand with which she had grasped the door
post.  And irrepressible delight and eagerness shone in her face.

"What am I coming for?" he repeated, looking straight into her
eyes.  "You know that I have come to be where you are," he said;
"I can't help it."

At that moment the wind, as it were, surmounting all obstacles,
sent the snow flying from the carriage roofs, and clanked some
sheet of iron it had torn off, while the hoarse whistle of the
engine roared in front, plaintively and gloomily.  All the
awfulness of the storm seemed to her more splendid now.  He had
said what her soul longed to hear, though she feared it with her
reason.  She made no answer, and in her face he saw conflict.

"Forgive me, if you dislike what I said," he said humbly.

He had spoken courteously, deferentially, yet so firmly, so
stubbornly, that for a long while she could make no answer.

"It's wrong, what you say, and I beg you, if you're a good man,
to forget what you've said, as I forget it," she said at last.

"Not one word, not one gesture of yours shall I, could I, ever
forget..."

"Enough, enough!" she cried trying assiduously to give a stern
expression to her face, into which he was gazing greedily.  And
clutching at the cold door post, she clambered up the steps and
got rapidly into the corridor of the carriage.  But in the little
corridor she paused, going over in her imagination what had
happened.  Though she could not recall her own words or his, she
realized instinctively that the momentary conversation had
brought them fearfully closer; and she was panic-stricken and
blissful at it.  After standing still a few seconds, she went
into the carriage and sat down in her place.  The overstrained
condition which had tormented her before did not only come back,
but was intensified, and reached such a pitch that she was afraid
every minute that something would snap within her from the
excessive tension.  She did not sleep all night.  But in that
nervous tension, and in the visions that filled her imagination,
there was nothing disagreeable or gloomy:  on the contrary there
was something blissful, glowing, and exhilarating.  Towards
morning Anna sank into a doze, sitting in her place, and when she
waked it was daylight and the train was near Petersburg.  At once
thoughts of home, of husband and of son, and the details of that
day and the following came upon her.

At Petersburg, as soon as the train stopped and she got out, the
first person that attracted her attention was her husband.  "Oh,
mercy! why do his ears look like that?" she thought, looking at
his frigid and imposing figure, and especially the ears that
struck her at the moment as propping up the brim of his round
hat.  Catching sight of her, he came to meet her, his lips
falling into their habitual sarcastic smile, and his big, tired
eyes looking straight at her.  An unpleasant sensation gripped at
her heart when she met his obstinate and weary glance, as though
she had expected to see him different.  She was especially struck
by the feeling of dissatisfaction with herself that she
experienced on meeting him.  That feeling was an intimate,
familiar feeling, like a consciousness of hypocrisy, which she
experienced in her relations with her husband.  But hitherto she
had not taken note of the feeling, now she was clearly and
painfully aware of it.

"Yes, as you see, your tender spouse, as devoted as the first
year after marriage, burned with impatience to see you," he said
in his deliberate, high-pitched voice, and in that tone which he
almost always took with her, a tone of jeering at anyone who
should say in earnest what he said.

"Is Seryozha quite well?" she asked.

"And is this all the reward," said he, "for my ardor? He's quite
well..."



Chapter 31


Vronsky had not even tried to sleep all that night.  He sat in
his armchair, looking straight before him or scanning the people
who got in and out.  If he had indeed on previous occasions
struck and impressed people who did not know him by his air of
unhesitating composure, he seemed now more haughty and
self-possessed than ever.  He looked at people as if they were
things.  A nervous young man, a clerk in a law court, sitting
opposite him, hated him for that look.  The young man asked him
for a light, and entered into conversation with him, and even
pushed against him, to make him feel that he was not a thing, but
a person.  But Vronsky gazed at him exactly as he did at the
lamp, and the young man made a wry face, feeling that he was
losing his self-possession under the oppression of this refusal
to recognize him as a person.

Vronsky saw nothing and no one.  He felt himself a king, not
because he believed that he had made an impression on Anna--he
did not yet believe that,--but because the impression she had
made on him gave him happiness and pride.

What would come of it all he did not know, he did not even think.
He felt that all his forces, hitherto dissipated, wasted, were
centered on one thing, and bent with fearful energy on one
blissful goal.  And he was happy at it.  He knew only that he had
told her the truth, that he had come where she was, that all the
happiness of his life, the only meaning in life for him, now lay
in seeing and hearing her.  And when he got out of the carriage
at Bologova to get some seltzer water, and caught sight of Anna,
involuntarily his first word had told her just what he thought.
And he was glad he had told her it, that she knew it now and was
thinking of it.  He did not sleep all night.  When he was back in
the carriage, he kept unceasingly going over every position in
which he had seen her, every word she had uttered, and before his
fancy, making his heart faint with emotion, floated pictures of a
possible future.

When he got out of the train at Petersburg, he felt after his
sleepless night as keen and fresh as after a cold bath.  He
paused near his compartment, waiting for her to get out.  "Once
more," he said to himself, smiling unconsciously, "once more I
shall see her walk, her face; she will say something, turn her
head, glance, smile, maybe."  But before he caught sight of her,
he saw her husband, whom the station-master was deferentially
escorting through the crowd.  "Ah, yes!  The husband."  Only now
for the first time did Vronsky realize clearly the fact that
there was a person attached to her, a husband.  He knew that she
had a husband, but had hardly believed in his existence, and only
now fully believed in him, with his head and shoulders, and his
legs clad in black trousers; especially when he saw this husband
calmly take her arm with a sense of property.

Seeing Alexey Alexandrovitch with his Petersburg face and
severely self-confident figure, in his round hat, with his rather
prominent spine, he believed in him, and was aware of a
disagreeable sensation, such as a man might feel tortured by
thirst, who, on reaching a spring, should find a dog, a sheep, or
a pig, who has drunk of it and muddied the water.  Alexey
Alexandrovitch's manner of walking, with a swing of the hips and
flat feet, particularly annoyed Vronsky.  He could recognize in
no one but himself an indubitable right to love her.  But she was
still the same, and the sight of her affected him the same way,
physically reviving him, stirring him, and filling his soul with
rapture.  He told his German valet, who ran up to him from the
second class, to take his things and go on, and he himself went
up to her.  He saw the first meeting between the husband and
wife, and noted with a lover's insight the signs of slight
reserve with which she spoke to her husband.  "No, she does not
love him and cannot love him," he decided to himself.

At the moment when he was approaching Anna Arkadyevna he noticed
too with joy that she was conscious of his being near, and looked
round, and seeing him, turned again to her husband.

"Have you passed a good night?" he asked, bowing to her and her
husband together, and leaving it up to Alexey Alexandrovitch to
accept the bow on his own account, and to recognize it or not, as
he might see fit.

"Thank you, very good," she answered.

Her face looked weary, and there was not that play of eagerness
in it, peeping out in her smile and her eyes; but for a single
instant, as she glanced at him, there was a flash of something in
her eyes, and although the flash died away at once, he was happy
for that moment.  She glanced at her husband to find out whether
he knew Vronsky.  Alexey Alexandrovitch looked at Vronsky with
displeasure, vaguely recalling who this was.  Vronsky's composure
and self-confidence here struck, like a scythe against a stone,
upon the cold self-confidence of Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Count Vronsky," said Anna.

"Ah! We are acquainted, I believe," said Alexey Alexandrovitch
indifferently, giving his hand.

"You set off with the mother and you return with the son," he
said, articulating each syllable, as though each were a separate
favor he was bestowing.

"You're back from leave, I suppose?" he said, and without waiting
for a reply, he turned to his wife in his jesting tone: "Well,
were a great many tears shed at Moscow at parting?"

By addressing his wife like this he gave Vronsky to understand
that he wished to be left alone, and, turning slightly towards
him, he touched his hat; but Vronsky turned to Anna Arkadyevna.

"I hope I may have the honor of calling on you," he said.

Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced with his weary eyes at Vronsky.

"Delighted," he said coldly.  "On Mondays we're at home.  Most
fortunate," he said to his wife, dismissing Vronsky altogether,
"that I should just have half an hour to meet you, so that I can
prove my devotion," he went on in the same jesting tone.

"You lay too much stress on your devotion for me to value it
much," she responded in the same jesting tone, involuntarily
listening to the sound of Vronsky's steps behind them.  "But what
has it to do with me?" she said to herself, and she began asking
her husband how Seryozha had got on without her.

"Oh, capitally! Mariette says he has been very good, And...I
must disappoint you...but he has not missed you as your husband
has.  But once more _merci,_ my dear, for giving me a day.  Our
dear _Samovar_ will be delighted."  (He used to call the Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, well known in society, a samovar, because she was
always bubbling over with excitement.)  "She has been continually
asking after you.  And, do you know, if I may venture to advise
you, you should go and see her today.  You know how she takes
everything to heart.  Just now, with all her own cares, she's
anxious about the Oblonskys being brought together."

The Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a friend of her husband's, and
the center of that one of the coteries of the Petersburg world
with which Anna was, through her husband, in the closest
relations.

"But you know I wrote to her?"

"Still she'll want to hear details.  Go and see her, if you're
not too tired, my dear.  Well, Kondraty will take you in the
carriage, while I go to my committee.  I shall not be alone at
dinner again," Alexey Alexandrovitch went on, no longer in a
sarcastic tone.  "You wouldn't believe how I've missed..."  And
with a long pressure of her hand and a meaning smile, he put her
in her carriage.




Chapter 32


The first person to meet Anna at home was her son.  He dashed
down the stairs to her, in spite of the governess's call, and
with desperate joy shrieked:  "Mother! mother!"  Running up to
her, he hung on her neck.

"I told you it was mother!" he shouted to the governess.  "I
knew!"

And her son, like her husband, aroused in Anna a feeling akin to
disappointment.  She had imagined him better than he was in
reality.  She had to let herself drop down to the reality to
enjoy him as he really was.  But even as he was, he was charming,
with his fair curls, his blue eyes, and his plump, graceful
little legs in tightly pulled-up stockings.  Anna experienced
almost physical pleasure in the sensation of his nearness, and
his caresses, and moral soothing, when she met his simple,
confiding, and loving glance, and heard his naïve questions.
Anna took out the presents Dolly's children had sent him, and
told her son what sort of little girl was Tanya at Moscow, and
how Tanya could read, and even taught the other children.

"Why, am I not so nice as she?" asked Seryozha.

"To me you're nicer than anyone in the world."

"I know that," said Seryozha, smiling.

Anna had not had time to drink her coffee when the Countess Lidia
Ivanovna was announced.  The Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a tall,
stout woman, with an unhealthily sallow face and splendid,
pensive black eyes.  Anna liked her, but today she seemed to be
seeing her for the first time with all her defects.

"Well, my dear, so you took the olive branch?" inquired Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, as soon as she came into the room.

"Yes, it's all over, but it was all much less serious than we had
supposed," answered Anna.  "My _belle-soeur_ is in general too
hasty."

But Countess Lidia Ivanovna, though she was interested in
everything that did not concern her, had a habit of never
listening to what interested her; she interrupted Anna:

"Yes, there's plenty of sorrow and evil in the world.  I am so
worried today."

"Oh, why?" asked Anna, trying to suppress a smile.

"I'm beginning to be weary of fruitlessly championing the truth,
and sometimes I'm quite unhinged by it.  The Society of the
Little Sisters" (this was a religiously-patriotic, philanthropic
institution) "was going splendidly, but with these gentlemen it's
impossible to do anything," added Countess Lidia Ivanovna in a
tone of ironical submission to destiny.  "They pounce on the
idea, and distort it, and then work it out so pettily and
unworthily.  Two or three people, your husband among them,
understand all the importance of the thing, but the others simply
drag it down.  Yesterday Pravdin wrote to me..."

Pravdin was a well-known Panslavist abroad, and Countess Lidia
Ivanovna described the purport of his letter.

Then the countess told her of more disagreements and intrigues
against the work of the unification of the churches, and departed
in haste, as she had that day to be at the meeting of some
society and also at the Slavonic committee.

"It was all the same before, of course; but why was it I didn't
notice it before?" Anna asked herself.  "Or has she been very
much irritated today? It's really ludicrous; her object is doing
good; she a Christian, yet she's always angry; and she always has
enemies, and always enemies in the name of Christianity and doing
good."

After Countess Lidia Ivanovna another friend came, the wife of a
chief secretary, who told her all the news of the town.  At three
o'clock she too went away, promising to come to dinner.  Alexey
Alexandrovitch was at the ministry.  Anna, left alone, spent the
time till dinner in assisting at her son's dinner (he dined apart
from his parents) and in putting her things in order, and in
reading and answering the notes and letters which had accumulated
on her table.

The feeling of causeless shame, which she had felt on the
journey, and her excitement, too, had completely vanished.  In
the habitual conditions of her life she felt again resolute and
irreproachable.

She recalled with wonder her state of mind on the previous day.
"What was it?  Nothing.  Vronsky said something silly, which it
was easy to put a stop to, and I answered as I ought to have
done.  To speak of it to my husband would be unnecessary and out
of the question.  To speak of it would be to attach importance to
what has no importance."  She remembered how she had told her
husband of what was almost a declaration made her at Petersburg
by a young man, one of her husband's subordinates, and how Alexey
Alexandrovitch had answered that every woman living in the world
was exposed to such incidents, but that he had the fullest
confidence in her tact, and could never lower her and himself by
jealousy.  "So then there's no reason to speak of it?  And
indeed, thank God, there's nothing to speak of," she told
herself.



Chapter 33


Alexey Alexandrovitch came back from the meeting of the ministers
at four o'clock, but as often happened, he had not time to come
in to her.  He went into his study to see the people waiting for
him with petitions, and to sign some papers brought him by his
chief secretary.  At dinner time (there were always a few people
dining with the Karenins) there arrived an old lady, a cousin of
Alexey Alexandrovitch, the chief secretary of the department and
his wife, and a young man who had been recommended to Alexey
Alexandrovitch for the service.  Anna went into the drawing room
to receive these guests.  Precisely at five o'clock, before the
bronze Peter the First clock had struck the fifth stroke, Alexey
Alexandrovitch came in, wearing a white tie and evening coat with
two stars, as he had to go out directly after dinner.  Every
minute of Alexey Alexandrovitch's life was portioned out and
occupied.  And to make time to get through all that lay before
him every day, he adhered to the strictest punctuality.
"Unhasting and unresting," was his motto.  He came into the
dining hall, greeted everyone, and hurriedly sat down, smiling to
his wife.

"Yes, my solitude is over.  You wouldn't believe how
uncomfortable" (he laid stress on the word _uncomfortable_) "it
is to dine alone."

At dinner he talked a little to his wife about Moscow matters,
and, with a sarcastic smile, asked her after Stepan Arkadyevitch;
but the conversation was for the most part general, dealing with
Petersburg official and public news.  After dinner he spent half
an hour with his guests, and again, with a smile, pressed his
wife's hand, withdrew, and drove off to the council.  Anna did
not go out that evening either to the Princess Betsy Tverskaya,
who, hearing of her return, had invited her, nor to the theater,
where she had a box for that evening.  She did not go out
principally because the dress she had reckoned upon was not
ready.  Altogether, Anna, on turning, after the departure of her
guests, to the consideration of her attire, was very much
annoyed.  She was generally a mistress of the art of dressing
well without great expense, and before leaving Moscow she had
given her dressmaker three dresses to transform.  The dresses had
to be altered so that they could not be recognized, and they
ought to have been ready three days before.  It appeared that two
dresses had not been done at all, while the other one had not
been altered as Anna had intended.  The dressmaker came to
explain, declaring that it would be better as she had done it,
and Anna was so furious that she felt ashamed when she thought of
it afterwards.  To regain her serenity completely she went into
the nursery, and spent the whole evening with her son, put him to
bed herself, signed him with the cross, and tucked him up.  She
was glad she had not gone out anywhere, and had spent the evening
so well.  She felt so light-hearted and serene, she saw so
clearly that all that had seemed to her so important on her
railway journey was only one of the common trivial incidents of
fashionable life, and that she had no reason to feel ashamed
before anyone else or before herself.  Anna sat down at the
hearth with an English novel and waited for her husband.  Exactly
at half-past nine she heard his ring, and he came into the room.

"Here you are at last!" she observed, holding out her hand to
him.

He kissed her hand and sat down beside her.

"Altogether then, I see your visit was a success," he said to
her.

"Oh, yes," she said, and she began telling him about everything
from the beginning: her journey with Countess Vronskaya, her
arrival, the accident at the station.  Then she described the
pity she had felt, first for her brother, and afterwards for
Dolly.

"I imagine one cannot exonerate such a man from blame, though he
is your brother," said Alexey Alexandrovitch severely.

Anna smiled.  She knew that he said that simply to show that
family considerations could not prevent him from expressing his
genuine opinion.  She knew that characteristic in her husband,
and liked it.

"I am glad it has all ended so satisfactorily, and that you are
back again," he went on.  "Come, what do they say about the new
act I have got passed in the council?"

Anna had heard nothing of this act, And she felt
conscience-stricken at having been able so readily to forget what
was to him of such importance.

"Here, on the other hand, it has made a great sensation," he
said, with a complacent smile.

She saw that Alexey Alexandrovitch wanted to tell her something
pleasant to him about it, and she brought him by questions to
telling it.  With the same complacent smile he told her of the
ovations he had received in consequence of the act he had
passed.

"I was very, very glad.  It shows that at last a reasonable and
steady view of the matter is becoming prevalent among us."

Having drunk his second cup of tea with cream, and bread, Alexey
Alexandrovitch got up, and was going towards his study.

"And you've not been anywhere this evening? You've been dull, I
expect?" he said.

"Oh, no!" she answered, getting up after him and accompanying him
across the room to his study.  "What are you reading now?" she
asked.

"Just now I'm reading Duc de Lille, _Poésie des Enfers,_"
he answered.  "A very remarkable book."

Anna smiled, as people smile at the weaknesses of those they
love, and, putting her hand under his, she escorted him to the
door of the study.  She knew his habit, that had grown into a
necessity, of reading in the evening.  She knew, too, that in
spite of his official duties, which swallowed up almost the whole
of his time, he considered it his duty to keep up with everything
of note that appeared in the intellectual world.  She knew, too,
that he was really interested in books dealing with politics,
philosophy, and theology, that art was utterly foreign to his
nature; but, in spite of this, or rather, in consequence of it,
Alexey Alexandrovitch never passed over anything in the world of
art, but made it his duty to read everything.  She knew that in
politics, in philosophy, in theology, Alexey Alexandrovitch often
had doubts, and made investigations; but on questions of art and
poetry, and, above all, of music, of which he was totally devoid
of understanding, he had the most distinct and decided opinions.
He was fond of talking about Shakespeare, Raphael, Beethoven, of
the significance of new schools of poetry and music, all of which
were classified by him with very conspicuous consistency.

"Well, God be with you," she said at the door of the study, where
a shaded candle and a decanter of water were already put by his
armchair.  "And I'll write to Moscow."

He pressed her hand, and again kissed it.

"All the same he's a good man; truthful, good-hearted, and
remarkable in his own line," Anna said to herself going back to
her room, as though she were defending him to someone who had
attacked him and said that one could not love him.  "But why is
it his ears stick out so strangely? Or has he had his hair cut?"

Precisely at twelve o'clock, when Anna was still sitting at her
writing table, finishing a letter to Dolly, she heard the sound
of measured steps in slippers, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, freshly
washed and combed, with a book under his arm, came in to her.

"It's time, it's time," said he, with a meaning smile, and he
went into their bedroom.

"And what right had he to look at him like that?" thought Anna,
recalling Vronsky's glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch.

Undressing, she went into the bedroom; but her face had none of
the eagerness which, during her stay in Moscow, had fairly
flashed from her eyes and her smile; on the contrary, now the
fire seemed quenched in her, hidden somewhere far away.



Chapter 34


When Vronsky went to Moscow from Petersburg, he had left his
large set of rooms in Morskaia to his friend and favorite comrade
Petritsky.

Petritsky was a young lieutenant, not particularly
well-connected, and not merely not wealthy, but always hopelessly
in debt.  Towards evening he was always drunk, and he had often
been locked up after all sorts of ludicrous and disgraceful
scandals, but he was a favorite both of his comrades and his
superior officers.  On arriving at twelve o'clock from the
station at his flat, Vronsky saw, at the outer door, a hired
carriage familiar to him.  While still outside his own door, as
he rang, he heard masculine laughter, the lisp of a feminine
voice, and Petritsky's voice.  "If that's one of the villains,
don't let him in!"  Vronsky told the servant not to announce him,
and slipped quietly into the first room.  Baroness Shilton, a
friend of Petritsky's, with a rosy little face and flaxen hair,
resplendent in a lilac satin gown, and filling the whole room,
like a canary, with her Parisian chatter, sat at the round table
making coffee.  Petritsky, in his overcoat, and the cavalry
captain Kamerovsky, in full uniform, probably just come from
duty, were sitting each side of her.

"Bravo! Vronsky!" shouted Petritsky, jumping up, scraping his
chair.  "Our host himself!  Baroness, some coffee for him out of
the new coffee pot.  Why, we didn't expect you!  Hope you're
satisfied with the ornament of your study," he said, indicating
the baroness.  "You know each other, of course?"

"I should think so," said Vronsky, with a bright smile, pressing
the baroness's little hand.  "What next!  I'm an old friend."

"You're home after a journey," said the baroness, "so I'm flying.
Oh, I'll be off this minute, if I'm in the way."

"You're home, wherever you are, baroness," said Vronsky.  "How do
you do, Kamerovsky?" he added, coldly shaking hands with
Kamerovsky.

"There, you never know how to say such pretty things," said the
baroness, turning to Petritsky.

"No; what's that for?  After dinner I say things quite as good."

"After dinner there's no credit in them?  Well, then, I'll make
you some coffee, so go and wash and get ready," said the
baroness, sitting down again, and anxiously turning the screw in
the new coffee pot.  "Pierre, give me the coffee," she said,
addressing Petritsky, whom she called Pierre as a contraction of
his surname, making no secret of her relations with him.  "I'll
put it in."

"You'll spoil it!"

"No, I won't spoil it!  Well, and your wife?" said the baroness
suddenly, interrupting Vronsky's conversation with his comrade.
"We've been marrying you here.  Have you brought your wife?"

"No, baroness.  I was born a Bohemian, and a Bohemian I shall
die."

"So much the better, so much the better.  Shake hands on it."

And the baroness, detaining Vronsky, began telling him, with many
jokes, about her last new plans of life, asking his advice.

"He persists in refusing to give me a divorce! Well, what am I
to do?"  (_He_ was her husband.)  "Now I want to begin a suit
against him.  What do you advise?  Kamerovsky, look after the
coffee; it's boiling over.  You see, I'm engrossed with business!
I want a lawsuit, because I must have my property.  Do you
understand the folly of it, that on the pretext of my being
unfaithful to him," she said contemptuously, "he wants to get the
benefit of my fortune."

Vronsky heard with pleasure this light-hearted prattle of a
pretty woman, agreed with her, gave her half-joking counsel, and
altogether dropped at once into the tone habitual to him in
talking to such women.  In his Petersburg world all people were
divided into utterly opposed classes.  One, the lower class,
vulgar, stupid, and, above all, ridiculous people, who believe
that one husband ought to live with the one wife whom he has
lawfully married; that a girl should be innocent, a woman modest,
and a man manly, self-controlled, and strong; that one ought to
bring up one's children, earn one's bread, and pay one's debts;
and various similar absurdities.  This was the class of
old-fashioned and ridiculous people.  But there was another class
of people, the real people.  To this class they all belonged, and
in it the great thing was to be elegant, generous, plucky, gay,
to abandon oneself without a blush to every passion, and to laugh
at everything else.

For the first moment only, Vronsky was startled after the
impression of a quite different world that he had brought with
him from Moscow.  But immediately as though slipping his feet
into old slippers, he dropped back into the light-hearted,
pleasant world he had always lived in.

The coffee was never really made, but spluttered over every one,
and boiled away, doing just what was required of it--that is,
providing much cause for much noise and laughter, and spoiling a
costly rug and the baroness's gown.

"Well now, good-bye, or you'll never get washed, and I shall have
on my conscience the worst sin a gentleman can commit.  So you
would advise a knife to his throat?"

"To be sure, and manage that your hand may not be far from his
lips.  He'll kiss your hand, and all will end satisfactorily,"
answered Vronsky.

"So at the Francais!" and, with a rustle of her skirts, she
vanished.

Kamerovsky got up too, and Vronsky, not waiting for him to go,
shook hands and went off to his dressing room.

While he was washing, Petritsky described to him in brief
outlines his position, as far as it had changed since Vronsky had
left Petersburg.  No money at all.  His father said he wouldn't
give him any and pay his debts.  His tailor was trying to get him
locked up, and another fellow, too, was threatening to get him
locked up.  The colonel of the regiment had announced that if
these scandals did not cease he would have to leave.  As for the
baroness, he was sick to death of her, especially since she'd
taken to offering continually to lend him money.  But he had
found a girl--he'd show her to Vronsky--a marvel, exquisite, in
the strict Oriental style, "genre of the slave Rebecca, don't
you know."  He'd had a row, too, with Berkoshov, and was going to
send seconds to him, but of course it would come to nothing.
Altogether everything was supremely amusing and jolly.  And, not
letting his comrade enter into further details of his position,
Petritsky proceeded to tell him all the interesting news.  As he
listened to Petritsky's familiar stories in the familiar setting
of the rooms he had spent the last three years in, Vronsky felt a
delightful sense of coming back to the careless Petersburg life
that he was used to.

"Impossible!" he cried, letting down the pedal of the washing
basin in which he had been sousing his healthy red neck.
"Impossible!" he cried, at the news that Laura had flung over
Fertinghof and had made up to Mileev.  "And is he as stupid and
pleased as ever? Well, and how's Buzulukov?"

"Oh, there is a tale about Buzulukov--simply lovely!" cried
Petritsky.  "You know his weakness for balls, and he never misses
a single court ball.  He went to a big ball in a new helmet.
Have you seen the new helmets?  Very nice, lighter.  Well, so
he's standing....  No, I say, do listen."

"I am listening," answered Vronsky, rubbing himself with a rough
towel.

"Up comes the Grand Duchess with some ambassador or other, and,
as ill-luck would have it, she begins talking to him about the
new helmets.  The Grand Duchess positively wanted to show the new
helmet to the ambassador.  They see our friend standing there."
(Petritsky mimicked how he was standing with the helmet.) "The
Grand Duchess asked him to give her the helmet; he doesn't give
it to her.  What do you think of that?  Well, every one's winking
at him, nodding, frowning--give it to her, do!  He doesn't give
it to her.  He's mute as a fish.  Only picture it!...  Well,
the...what's his name, whatever he was...tries to take the helmet
from him...he won't give it up!...  He pulls it from him, and
hands it to the Grand Duchess.  'Here, your Highness,' says he,
'is the new helmet.'  She turned the helmet the other side up,
And--just picture it!--plop went a pear and sweetmeats out of it,
two pounds of sweetmeats!...He'd been storing them up, the
darling!"

Vronsky burst into roars of laughter.  And long afterwards, when
he was talking of other things, he broke out into his healthy
laugh, showing his strong, close rows of teeth, when he thought
of the helmet.

Having heard all the news, Vronsky, with the assistance of his
valet, got into his uniform, and went off to report himself.  He
intended, when he had done that, to drive to his brother's and to
Betsy's and to pay several visits with a view to beginning to go
into that society where he might meet Madame Karenina.  As he
always did in Petersburg, he left home not meaning to return till
late at night.





PART TWO




Chapter 1


At the end of the winter, in the Shtcherbatskys' house, a
consultation was being held, which was to pronounce on the state
of Kitty's health and the measures to be taken to restore her
failing strength.  She had been ill, and as spring came on she
grew worse.  The family doctor gave her cod liver oil, then iron,
then nitrate of silver, but as the first and the second and the
third were alike in doing no good, and as his advice when spring
came was to go abroad, a celebrated physician was called in.  The
celebrated physician, a very handsome man, still youngish, asked
to examine the patient.  He maintained, with peculiar
satisfaction, it seemed, that maiden modesty is a mere relic of
barbarism, and that nothing could be more natural than for a man
still youngish to handle a young girl naked.  He thought it
natural because he did it every day, and felt and thought, as it
seemed to him, no harm as he did it and consequently he
considered modesty in the girl not merely as a relic of
barbarism, but also as an insult to himself.

There was nothing for it but to submit, since, although all the
doctors had studied in the same school, had read the same books,
and learned the same science, and though some people said this
celebrated doctor was a bad doctor, in the princess's household
and circle it was for some reason accepted that this celebrated
doctor alone had some special knowledge, and that he alone could
save Kitty.  After a careful examination and sounding of the
bewildered patient, dazed with shame, the celebrated doctor,
having scrupulously washed his hands, was standing in the drawing
room talking to the prince.  The prince frowned and coughed,
listening to the doctor.  As a man who had seen something of
life, and neither a fool nor an invalid, he had no faith in
medicine, and in his heart was furious at the whole farce,
specially as he was perhaps the only one who fully comprehended
the cause of Kitty's illness.  "Conceited blockhead!" he thought,
as he listened to the celebrated doctor's chatter about his
daughter's symptoms.  The doctor was meantime with difficulty
restraining the expression of his contempt for this old
gentleman, and with difficulty condescending to the level of his
intelligence.  He perceived that it was no good talking to the
old man, and that the principal person in the house was the
mother.  Before her he decided to scatter his pearls.  At that
instant the princess came into the drawing room with the family
doctor.  The prince withdrew, trying not to show how ridiculous
he thought the whole performance.  The princess was distracted,
and did not know what to do.  She felt she had sinned against
Kitty.

"Well, doctor, decide our fate," said the princess.  "Tell me
everything."

"Is there hope?" she meant to say, but her lips quivered, and she
could not utter the question.  "Well, doctor?"

"Immediately, princess.  I will talk it over with my colleague,
and then I will have the honor of laying my opinion before you."

"So we had better leave you?"

"As you please."

The princess went out with a sigh.

When the doctors were left alone, the family doctor began timidly
explaining his opinion, that there was a commencement of
tuberculous trouble, but...and so on.  The celebrated doctor
listened to him, and in the middle of his sentence looked at his
big gold watch.

"Yes," said he.  "But..."

The family doctor respectfully ceased in the middle of his
observations.

"The commencement of the tuberculous process we are not, as you
are aware, able to define; till there are cavities, there is
nothing definite.  But we may suspect it.  And there are
indications; malnutrition, nervous excitability, and so on.  The
question stands thus: in presence of indications of tuberculous
process, what is to be done to maintain nutrition?"

"But, you know, there are always moral, spiritual causes at the
back in these cases," the family doctor permitted himself to
interpolate with a subtle smile.

"Yes, that's an understood thing," responded the celebrated
physician, again glancing at his watch.  "Beg pardon, is the
Yausky bridge done yet, or shall I have to drive around?" he
asked.  "Ah! it is.  Oh, well, then I can do it in twenty
minutes.  So we were saying the problem may be put thus: to
maintain nutrition and to give tone to the nerves.  The one is in
close connection with the other, one must attack both sides at
once."

"And how about a tour abroad?" asked the family doctor.

"I've no liking for foreign tours.  And take note: if there is
an early stage of tuberculous process, of which we cannot be
certain, a foreign tour will be of no use.  What is wanted is
means of improving nutrition, and not for lowering it." And the
celebrated doctor expounded his plan of treatment with Soden
waters, a remedy obviously prescribed primarily on the ground
that they could do no harm.

The family doctor listened attentively and respectfully.

"But in favor of foreign travel I would urge the change of
habits, the removal from conditions calling up reminiscences.
And then the mother wishes it," he added.

"Ah!  Well, in that case, to be sure, let them go.  Only, those
German quacks are mischievous....  They ought to be persuaded....
Well, let them go then."

He glanced once more at his watch.

"Oh! time's up already," And he went to the door.  The celebrated
doctor announced to the princess (a feeling of what was due from
him dictated his doing so) that he ought to see the patient once
more.

"What! another examination!" cried the mother, with horror.

"Oh, no, only a few details, princess."

"Come this way."

And the mother, accompanied by the doctor, went into the drawing
room to Kitty.  Wasted and flushed, with a peculiar glitter in
her eyes, left there by the agony of shame she had been put
through, Kitty stood in the middle of the room.  When the doctor
came in she flushed crimson, and her eyes filled with tears.  All
her illness and treatment struck her as a thing so stupid,
ludicrous even!  Doctoring her seemed to her as absurd as
putting together the pieces of a broken vase.  Her heart was
broken.  Why would they try to cure her with pills and powders?
But she could not grieve her mother, especially as her mother
considered herself to blame.

"May I trouble you to sit down, princess?" the celebrated doctor
said to her.

He sat down with a smile, facing her, felt her pulse, and again
began asking her tiresome questions.  She answered him, and all at
once got up, furious.

"Excuse me, doctor, but there is really no object in this.  This
is the third time you've asked me the same thing."

The celebrated doctor did not take offense.

"Nervous irritability," he said to the princess, when Kitty had
left the room.  "However, I had finished..."

And the doctor began scientifically explaining to the princess,
as an exceptionally intelligent woman, the condition of the young
princess, and concluded by insisting on the drinking of
the waters, which were certainly harmless.  At the question:
Should they go abroad? the doctor plunged into deep meditation,
as though resolving a weighty problem.  Finally his decision was
pronounced:  they were to go abroad, but to put no faith in
foreign quacks, and to apply to him in any need.

It seemed as though some piece of good fortune had come to pass
after the doctor had gone.  The mother was much more cheerful
when she went back to her daughter, and Kitty pretended to be
more cheerful.  She had often, almost always, to be pretending
now.

"Really, I'm quite well, mamma.  But if you want to go abroad,
let's go!" she said, and trying to appear interested in the
proposed tour, she began talking of the preparations for the
journey.



Chapter 2


Soon after the doctor, Dolly had arrived.  She knew that there
was to be a consultation that day, and though she was only just
up after her confinement (she had another baby, a little girl,
born at the end of the winter), though she had trouble and
anxiety enough of her own, she had left her tiny baby and a sick
child, to come and hear Kitty's fate, which was to be decided
that day.

"Well, well?" she said, coming into the drawing room, without
taking off her hat.  "You're all in good spirits.  Good news,
then?"

They tried to tell her what the doctor had said, but it appeared
that though the doctor had talked distinctly enough and at great
length, it was utterly impossible to report what he had said.
The only point of interest was that it was settled they should go
abroad.

Dolly could not help sighing.  Her dearest friend, her sister,
was going away.  And her life was not a cheerful one.  Her
relations with Stepan Arkadyevitch after their reconciliation had
become humiliating.  The union Anna had cemented turned out to be
of no solid character, and family harmony was breaking down again
at the same point.  There had been nothing definite, but Stepan
Arkadyevitch was hardly ever at home; money, too, was hardly ever
forthcoming, and Dolly was continually tortured by suspicions of
infidelity, which she tried to dismiss, dreading the agonies of
jealousy she had been through already.  The first onslaught of
jealousy, once lived through, could never come back again, and
even the discovery of infidelities could never now affect her as
it had the first time.  Such a discovery now would only mean
breaking up family habits, and she let herself be deceived,
despising him and still more herself, for the weakness.  Besides
this, the care of her large family was a constant worry to her:
first, the nursing of her young baby did not go well, then the
nurse had gone away, now one of the children had fallen ill.

"Well, how are all of you?" asked her mother.

"Ah, mamma, we have plenty of troubles of our own.  Lili is ill,
and I'm afraid it's scarlatina.  I have come here now to hear
about Kitty, and then I shall shut myself up entirely, if--God
forbid--it should be scarlatina."

The old prince too had come in from his study after the doctor's
departure, and after presenting his cheek to Dolly, and saying a
few words to her, he turned to his wife:

"How have you settled it? you're going?  Well, and what do you
mean to do with me?"

"I suppose you had better stay here, Alexander," said his wife.

"That's as you like."

"Mamma, why shouldn't father come with us?" said Kitty.  "It
would be nicer for him and for us too."

The old prince got up and stroked Kitty's hair.  She lifted her
head and looked at him with a forced smile.  It always seemed to
her that he understood her better than anyone in the family,
though he did not say much about her.  Being the youngest, she
was her father's favorite, and she fancied that his love gave him
insight.  When now her glance met his blue kindly eyes looking
intently at her, it seemed to her that he saw right through her,
and understood all that was not good that was passing within her.
Reddening, she stretched out towards him expecting a kiss, but he
only patted her hair and said:

"These stupid chignons! There's no getting at the real daughter.
One simply strokes the bristles of dead women.  Well, Dolinka,"
he turned to his elder daughter, "what's your young buck about,
hey?"

"Nothing, father," answered Dolly, understanding that her husband
was meant.  "He's always out; I scarcely ever see him," she could
not resist adding with a sarcastic smile.

"Why, hasn't he gone into the country yet--to see about selling
that forest?"

"No, he's still getting ready for the journey."

"Oh, that's it!" said the prince.  "And so am I to be getting
ready for a journey too?  At your service," he said to his wife,
sitting down.  "And I tell you what, Katia," he went on to his
younger daughter, "you must wake up one fine day and say to
yourself: Why, I'm quite well, and merry, and going out again
with father for an early morning walk in the frost.  Hey?"

What her father said seemed simple enough, yet at these words
Kitty became confused and overcome like a detected criminal.
"Yes, he sees it all, he understands it all, and in these words
he's telling me that though I'm ashamed, I must get over my
shame." She could not pluck up spirit to make any answer.  She
tried to begin, and all at once burst into tears, and rushed out
of the room.

"See what comes of your jokes!" the princess pounced down on her
husband.  "You're always..." she began a string of reproaches.

The prince listened to the princess's scolding rather a long
while without speaking, but his face was more and more frowning.

"She's so much to be pitied, poor child, so much to be pitied,
and you don't feel how it hurts her to hear the slightest
reference to the cause of it.  Ah! to be so mistaken in people!"
said the princess, and by the change in her tone both Dolly and
the prince knew she was speaking of Vronsky.  "I don't know why
there aren't laws against such base, dishonorable people."

"Ah, I can't bear to hear you!" said the prince gloomily, getting
up from his low chair, and seeming anxious to get away, yet
stopping in the doorway.  "There are laws, madam, and since
you've challenged me to it, I'll tell you who's to blame for it
all: you and you, you and nobody else.  Laws against such young
gallants there have always been, and there still are!  Yes, if
there has been nothing that ought not to have been, old as I am,
I'd have called him out to the barrier, the young dandy.  Yes,
and now you physic her and call in these quacks."

The prince apparently had plenty more to say, but as soon as the
princess heard his tone she subsided at once, and became
penitent, as she always did on serious occasions.

"Alexander, Alexander," she whispered, moving to him and
beginning to weep.

As soon as she began to cry the prince too calmed down.  He went
up to her.

"There, that's enough, that's enough!  You're wretched too, I
know.  It can't be helped.  There's no great harm done.  God is
merciful...thanks..." he said, not knowing what he was saying, as
he responded to the tearful kiss of the princess that he felt on
his hand.  And the prince went out of the room.

Before this, as soon as Kitty went out of the room in tears,
Dolly, with her motherly, family instincts, had promptly
perceived that here a woman's work lay before her, and she
prepared to do it.  She took off her hat, and, morally speaking,
tucked up her sleeves and prepared for action.  While her mother
was attacking her father, she tried to restrain her mother, so
far as filial reverence would allow.  During the prince's
outburst she was silent; she felt ashamed for her mother, and
tender towards her father for so quickly being kind again.  But
when her father left them she made ready for what was the chief
thing needful--to go to Kitty and console her.

"I'd been meaning to tell you something for a long while, mamma:
did you know that Levin meant to make Kitty an offer when he was
here the last time?  He told Stiva so."

"Well, what then? I don't understand..."

"So did Kitty perhaps refuse him?...  She didn't tell you so?"

"No, she has said nothing to me either of one or the other; she's
too proud.  But I know it's all on account of the other."

"Yes, but suppose she has refused Levin, and she wouldn't have
refused him if it hadn't been for the other, I know.  And then,
he has deceived her so horribly."

It was too terrible for the princess to think how she had sinned
against her daughter, and she broke out angrily.

"Oh, I really don't understand!  Nowadays they will all go their
own way, and mothers haven't a word to say in anything, and
then..."

"Mamma, I'll go up to her."

"Well, do.  Did I tell you not to?" said her mother.



Chapter 3


When she went into Kitty's little room, a pretty, pink little
room, full of knick-knacks in _vieux saxe,_ as fresh, and pink,
and white, and gay as Kitty herself had been two months ago,
Dolly remembered how they had decorated the room the year before
together, with what love and gaiety.  Her heart turned cold when
she saw Kitty sitting on a low chair near the door, her eyes
fixed immovably on a corner of the rug.  Kitty glanced at her
sister, and the cold, rather ill-tempered expression of her face
did not change.

"I'm just going now, and I shall have to keep in and you won't be
able to come to see me," said Dolly, sitting down beside her.  "I
want to talk to you."

"What about?" Kitty asked swiftly, lifting her head in dismay.

"What should it be, but your trouble?"

"I have no trouble."

"Nonsense, Kitty.  Do you suppose I could help knowing? I know
all about it.  And believe me, it's of so little
consequence....  We've all been through it."

Kitty did not speak, and her face had a stern expression.

"He's not worth your grieving over him," pursued Darya
Alexandrovna, coming straight to the point.

"No, because he has treated me with contempt," said Kitty, in a
breaking voice.  "Don't talk of it!  Please, don't talk of it!"

"But who can have told you so?  No one has said that.  I'm
certain he was in love with you, and would still be in love with
you, if it hadn't...

"Oh, the most awful thing of all for me is this sympathizing!"
shrieked Kitty, suddenly flying into a passion.  She turned round
on her chair, flushed crimson, and rapidly moving her fingers,
pinched the clasp of her belt first with one hand and then with
the other.  Dolly knew this trick her sister had of clenching her
hands when she was much excited; she knew, too, that in moments
of excitement Kitty was capable of forgetting herself and saying
a great deal too much, and Dolly would have soothed her, but it
was too late.

"What, what is it you want to make me feel, eh?" said Kitty
quickly.  "That I've been in love with a man who didn't care a
straw for me, and that I'm dying of love for him? And this is
said to me by my own sister, who imagines that...that...that
she's sympathizing with me!...I don't want these condolences
and humbug!"

"Kitty, you're unjust."

"Why are you tormenting me?"

"But I...quite the contrary...I see you're unhappy..."

But Kitty in her fury did not hear her.

"I've nothing to grieve over and be comforted about.  I am too
proud ever to allow myself to care for a man who does not love
me."

"Yes, I don't say so either....  Only one thing.  Tell me the
truth," said Darya Alexandrovna, taking her by the hand: "tell
me, did Levin speak to you?..."

The mention of Levin's name seemed to deprive Kitty of the last
vestige of self-control.  She leaped up from her chair, and
flinging her clasp on the ground, she gesticulated rapidly with
her hands and said:

"Why bring Levin in too? I can't understand what you want to
torment me for.  I've told you, and I say it again, that I have
some pride, and never, _never_ would I do as you're doing--go back
to a man who's deceived you, who has cared for another woman.  I
can't understand it!  You may, but I can't!"

And saying these words she glanced at her sister, and seeing that
Dolly sat silent, her head mournfully bowed, Kitty, instead of
running out of the room as she had meant to do, sat down near the
door, and hid her face in her handkerchief.

The silence lasted for two minutes: Dolly was thinking of
herself.  That humiliation of which she was always conscious came
back to her with a peculiar bitterness when her sister reminded
her of it.  She had not looked for such cruelty in her sister,
and she was angry with her.  But suddenly she heard the rustle of
