that had given her the victory, "how I feel on the brink of
calamity, how afraid I am of myself," saw that this weapon was a
dangerous one, and that it could not be used a second time.  And
she felt that beside the love that bound them together there had
grown up between them some evil spirit of strife, which she could
not exorcise from his, and still less from her own heart.



Chapter 13


There are no conditions to which a man cannot become used,
especially if he sees that all around him are living in the same
way.  Levin could not have believed three months before that he
could have gone quietly to sleep in the condition in which he was
that day, that leading an aimless, irrational life, living too
beyond his means, after drinking to excess (he could not call
what happened at the club anything else), forming inappropriately
friendly relations with a man with whom his wife had once been in
love, and a still more inappropriate call upon a woman who could
only be called a lost woman, after being fascinated by that woman
and causing his wife distress--he could still go quietly to
sleep.  But under the influence of fatigue, a sleepless night,
and the wine he had drunk, his sleep was sound and untroubled.

At five o'clock the creak of a door opening waked him.  He jumped
up and looked round.  Kitty was not in bed beside him.  But there
was a light moving behind the screen, and he heard her steps.

"What is it?...what is it?" he said, half-asleep.  "Kitty!
What is it?"

"Nothing," she said, coming from behind the screen with a candle
in her hand.  "I felt unwell," she said, smiling a particularly
sweet and meaning smile.

"What? has it begun?" he said in terror.  "We ought to send..."
and hurriedly he reached after his clothes.

"No, no," she said, smiling and holding his hand.  "It's sure to
be nothing.  I was rather unwell, only a little.  It's all over
now."

And getting into bed, she blew out the candle, lay down and was
still.  Though he thought her stillness suspicious, as though she
were holding her breath, and still more suspicious the expression
of peculiar tenderness and excitement with which, as she came
from behind the screen, she said "nothing," he was so sleepy that
he fell asleep at once.  Only later he remembered the stillness
of her breathing, and understood all that must have been passing
in her sweet, precious heart while she lay beside him, not
stirring, in anticipation of the greatest event in a woman's
life.  At seven o'clock he was waked by the touch of her hand on
his shoulder, and a gentle whisper.  She seemed struggling
between regret at waking him, and the desire to talk to him.

"Kostya, don't be frightened.  It's all right.  But I fancy....
We ought to send for Lizaveta Petrovna."

The candle was lighted again.  She was sitting up in bed, holding
some knitting, which she had been busy upon during the last few
days.

"Please, don't be frightened, it's all right.  I'm not a bit
afraid," she said, seeing his scared face, and she pressed his
hand to her bosom and then to her lips.

He hurriedly jumped up, hardly awake, and kept his eyes fixed on
her, as he put on his dressing gown; then he stopped, still
looking at her.  He had to go, but he could not tear himself from
her eyes.  He thought he loved her face, knew her expression, her
eyes, but never had he seen it like this.  How hateful and
horrible he seemed to himself, thinking of the distress he had
caused her yesterday.  Her flushed face, fringed with soft
curling hair under her night cap, was radiant with joy and
courage.

Though there was so little that was complex or artificial in
Kitty's character in general, Levin was struck by what was
revealed now, when suddenly all disguises were thrown off and the
very kernel of her soul shone in her eyes.  And in this
simplicity and nakedness of her soul, she, the very woman he
loved in her, was more manifest than ever.  She looked at him,
smiling; but all at once her brows twitched, she threw up her
head, and going quickly up to him, clutched his hand and pressed
close up to him, breathing her hot breath upon him.  She was in
pain and was, as it were, complaining to him of her suffering.
And for the first minute, from habit, it seemed to him that he
was to blame.  But in her eyes there was a tenderness that told
him that she was far from reproaching him, that she loved him for
her sufferings.  "If not I, who is to blame for it?" he thought
unconsciously, seeking someone responsible for this suffering for
him to punish; but there was no one responsible.  She was
suffering, complaining, and triumphing in her sufferings, and
rejoicing in them, and loving them.  He saw that something
sublime was being accomplished in her soul, but what?  He could
not make it out.  It was beyond his understanding.

"I have sent to mamma.  You go quickly to fetch Lizaveta Petrovna
...Kostya!...  Nothing, it's over."

She moved away from him and rang the bell.

"Well, go now; Pasha's coming.  I am all right."

And Levin saw with astonishment that she had taken up the
knitting she had brought in in the night and begun working at it
again.

As Levin was going out of one door, he heard the maid-servant
come in at the other.  He stood at the door and heard Kitty
giving exact directions to the maid, and beginning to help her
move the bedstead.

He dressed, and while they were putting in his horses, as a hired
sledge was not to be seen yet, he ran again up to the bedroom,
not on tiptoe, it seemed to him, but on wings.  Two maid-servants
were carefully moving something in the bedroom.

Kitty was walking about knitting rapidly and giving directions.

"I'm going for the doctor.  They have sent for Lizaveta Petrovna,
but I'll go on there too.  Isn't there anything wanted?  Yes,
shall I go to Dolly's?"

She looked at him, obviously not hearing what he was saying.

"Yes, yes.  Do go," she said quickly, frowning and waving her
hand to him.

He had just gone into the drawing room, when suddenly a plaintive
moan sounded from the bedroom, smothered instantly.  He stood
still, and for a long while he could not understand.

"Yes, that is she," he said to himself, and clutching at his head
he ran downstairs.

"Lord have mercy on us! pardon us! aid us!" he repeated the words
that for some reason came suddenly to his lips.  And he, an
unbeliever, repeated these words not with his lips only.  At that
instant he knew that all his doubts, even the impossibility of
believing with his reason, of which he was aware in himself, did
not in the least hinder his turning to God.  All of that now
floated out of his soul like dust.  To whom was he to turn if not
to Him in whose hands he felt himself, his soul, and his love?

The horse was not yet ready, but feeling a peculiar concentration
of his physical forces and his intellect on what he had to do, he
started off on foot without waiting for the horse, and told
Kouzma to overtake him.

At the corner he met a night cabman driving hurriedly.  In the
little sledge, wrapped in a velvet cloak, sat Lizaveta Petrovna
with a kerchief round her head.  "Thank God! thank God!" he said,
overjoyed to recognize her little fair face which wore a
peculiarly serious, even stern expression.  Telling the driver
not to stop, he ran along beside her.

"For two hours, then?  Not more?" she inquired.  "You should let
Pyotr Dmitrievitch know, but don't hurry him.  And get some opium
at the chemist's."

"So you think that it may go on well?  Lord have mercy on us and
help us!" Levin said, seeing his own horse driving out of the
gate.  Jumping into the sledge beside Kouzma, he told him to
drive to the doctor's.



Chapter 14


The doctor was not yet up, and the footman said that "he had been
up late, and had given orders not to be waked, but would get up
soon."  The footman was cleaning the lamp-chimneys, and seemed
very busy about them.  This concentration of the footman upon his
lamps, and his indifference to what was passing in Levin, at
first astounded him, but immediately on considering the question
he realized that no one knew or was bound to know his feelings,
and that it was all the more necessary to act calmly, sensibly,
and resolutely to get through this wall of indifference and
attain his aim.

"Don't be in a hurry or let anything slip," Levin said to
himself, feeling a greater and greater flow of physical energy
and attention to all that lay before him to do.

Having ascertained that the doctor was not getting up, Levin
considered various plans, and decided on the following one: that
Kouzma should go for another doctor, while he himself should go
to the chemist's for opium, and if when he came back the doctor
had not yet begun to get up, he would either by tipping the
footman, or by force, wake the doctor at all hazards.

At the chemist's the lank shopman sealed up a packet of powders
for a coachman who stood waiting, and refused him opium with the
same callousness with which the doctor's footman had cleaned his
lamp chimneys.  Trying not to get flurried or out of temper,
Levin mentioned the names of the doctor and midwife, and
explaining what the opium was needed for, tried to persuade him.
The assistant inquired in German whether he should give it, and
receiving an affirmative reply from behind the partition, he took
out a bottle and a funnel, deliberately poured the opium from a
bigger bottle into a little one, stuck on a label, sealed it up,
in spite of Levin's request that he would not do so, and was
about to wrap it up too.  This was more than Levin could stand;
he took the bottle firmly out of his hands, and ran to the big
glass doors.  The doctor was not even now getting up, and the
footman, busy now in putting down the rugs, refused to wake him.
Levin deliberately took out a ten rouble note, and, careful to
speak slowly, though losing no time over the business, he handed
him the note, and explained that Pyotr Dmitrievitch (what a great
and important personage he seemed to Levin now, this Pyotr
Dmitrievitch, who had been of so little consequence in his eyes
before!) had promised to come at any time; that he would
certainly not be angry! and that he must therefore wake him at
once.

The footman agreed, and went upstairs, taking Levin into the
waiting room.

Levin could hear through the door the doctor coughing, moving
about, washing, and saying something.  Three minutes passed; it
seemed to Levin that more than an hour had gone by.  He could not
wait any longer.

"Pyotr Dmitrievitch, Pyotr Dmitrievitch!" he said in an imploring
voice at the open door.  "For God's sake, forgive me! See me as
you are.  It's been going on more than two hours already."

"In a minute; in a minute!" answered a voice, and to his
amazement Levin heard that the doctor was smiling as he spoke.

"For one instant."

"In a minute."

Two minutes more passed while the doctor was putting on his
boots, and two minutes more while the doctor put on his coat and
combed his hair.

"Pyotr Dmitrievitch!" Levin was beginning again in a plaintive
voice, just as the doctor came in dressed and ready.  "These
people have no conscience," thought Levin.  "Combing his hair,
while we're dying!"

"Good morning!" the doctor said to him, shaking hands, and, as it
were, teasing him with his composure.  "There's no hurry.  Well
now?"

Trying to be as accurate as possible, Levin began to tell him
every unnecessary detail of his wife's condition, interrupting
his account repeatedly with entreaties that the doctor would come
with him at once.

"Oh, you needn't be in any hurry.  You don't understand, you
know.  I'm certain I'm not wanted, still I've promised, and if
you like, I'll come.  But there's no hurry.  Please sit down;
won't you have some coffee?"

Levin stared at him with eyes that asked whether he was laughing
at him; but the doctor had no notion of making fun of him.

"I know, I know," the doctor said, smiling; "I'm a married man
myself; and at these moments we husbands are very much to be
pitied.  I've a patient whose husband always takes refuge in the
stables on such occasions."

"But what do you think, Pyotr Dmitrievitch?  Do you suppose it
may go all right?"

"Everything points to a favorable issue."

"So you'll come immediately?" said Levin, looking wrathfully at
the servant who was bringing in the coffee.

"In an hour's time."

"Oh, for mercy's sake!"

"Well, let me drink my coffee, anyway."

The doctor started upon his coffee.  Both were silent.

"The Turks are really getting beaten, though.  Did you read
yesterday's telegrams?" said the doctor, munching some roll.

"No, I can't stand it!" said Levin, jumping up.  "So you'll be
with us in a quarter of an hour."

"In half an hour."

"On your honor?"

When Levin got home, he drove up at the same time as the
princess, and they went up to the bedroom door together.  The
princess had tears in her eyes, and her hands were shaking.
Seeing Levin, she embraced him, and burst into tears.

"Well, my dear Lizaveta Petrovna?" she queried, clasping the hand
of the midwife, who came out to meet them with a beaming and
anxious face.

"She's going on well," she said; "persuade her to lie down.  She
will be easier so."

From the moment when he had waked up and understood what was
going on, Levin had prepared his mind to bear resolutely what was
before him, and without considering or anticipating anything, to
avoid upsetting his wife, and on the contrary to soothe her and
keep up her courage.  Without allowing himself even to think of
what was to come, of how it would end, judging from his inquiries
as to the usual duration of these ordeals, Levin had in his
imagination braced himself to bear up and to keep a tight rein on
his feelings for five hours, and it had seemed to him he could do
this.  But when he came back from the doctor's and saw her
sufferings again, he fell to repeating more and more frequently:
"Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!" He sighed, and flung his
head up, and began to feel afraid he could not bear it, that he
would burst into tears or run away.  Such agony it was to him.
And only one hour had passed.

But after that hour there passed another hour, two hours, three,
the full five hours he had fixed as the furthest limit of his
sufferings, and the position was still unchanged; and he was
still bearing it because there was nothing to be done but bear
it; every instant feeling that he had reached the utmost limits
of his endurance, and that his heart would break with sympathy
and pain.

But still the minutes passed by and the hours, and still hours
more, and his misery and horror grew and were more and more
intense.

All the ordinary conditions of life, without which one can form
no conception of anything, had ceased to exist for Levin.  He
lost all sense of time.  Minutes--those minutes when she sent for
him and he held her moist hand, that would squeeze his hand with
extraordinary violence and then push it away--seemed to him
hours, and hours seemed to him minutes.  He was surprised when
Lizaveta Petrovna asked him to light a candle behind a screen,
and he found that it was five o'clock in the afternoon.  If he
had been told it was only ten o'clock in the morning, he would not
have been more surprised.  Where he was all this time, he knew as
little as the time of anything.  He saw her swollen face,
sometimes bewildered and in agony, sometimes smiling and trying
to reassure him.  He saw the old princess too, flushed and
overwrought, with her gray curls in disorder, forcing herself to
gulp down her tears, biting her lips; he saw Dolly too and the
doctor, smoking fat cigarettes, and Lizaveta Petrovna with a
firm, resolute, reassuring face, and the old prince walking up
and down the hall with a frowning face.  But why they came in and
went out, where they were, he did not know.  The princess was
with the doctor in the bedroom, then in the study, where a table
set for dinner suddenly appeared; then she was not there, but
Dolly was.  Then Levin remembered he had been sent somewhere.
Once he had been sent to move a table and sofa.  He had done this
eagerly, thinking it had to be done for her sake, and only later
on he found it was his own bed he had been getting ready.  Then
he had been sent to the study to ask the doctor something.  The
doctor had answered and then had said something about the
irregularities in the municipal council.  Then he had been sent
to the bedroom to help the old princess to move the holy picture
in its silver and gold setting, and with the princess's old
waiting maid he had clambered on a shelf to reach it and had
broken the little lamp, and the old servant had tried to reassure
him about the lamp and about his wife, and he carried the holy
picture and set it at Kitty's head, carefully tucking it in
behind the pillow.  But where, when, and why all this had
happened, he could not tell.  He did not understand why the old
princess took his hand, and looking compassionately at him,
begged him not to worry himself, and Dolly persuaded him to eat
something and led him out of the room, and even the doctor looked
seriously and with commiseration at him and offered him a drop of
something.

All he knew and felt was that what was happening was what had
happened nearly a year before in the hotel of the country town at
the deathbed of his brother Nikolay.  But that had been grief--
this was joy.  Yet that grief and this joy were alike outside all
the ordinary conditions of life; they were loop-holes, as it were,
in that ordinary life through which there came glimpses of
something sublime.  And in the contemplation of this sublime
something the soul was exalted to inconceivable heights of which
it had before had no conception, while reason lagged behind,
unable to keep up with it.

"Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!" he repeated to himself
incessantly, feeling, in spite of his long and, as it seemed,
complete alienation from religion, that he turned to God just as
trustfully and simply as he had in his childhood and first youth.

All this time he had two distinct spiritual conditions.  One was
away from her, with the doctor, who kept smoking one fat
cigarette after another and extinguishing them on the edge of a
full ash tray, with Dolly, and with the old prince, where there
was talk about dinner, about politics, about Marya Petrovna's
illness, and where Levin suddenly forgot for a minute what was
happening, and felt as though he had waked up from sleep; the
other was in her presence, at her pillow, where his heart seemed
breaking and still did not break from sympathetic suffering, and
he prayed to God without ceasing.  And every time he was brought
back from a moment of oblivion by a scream reaching him from the
bedroom, he fell into the same strange terror that had come upon
him the first minute.  Every time he heard a shriek, he jumped
up, ran to justify himself, remembered on the way that he was not
to blame, and he longed to defend her, to help her.  But as he
looked at her, he saw again that help was impossible, and he was
filled with terror and prayed: "Lord, have mercy on us, and help
us!"  And as time went on, both these conditions became more
intense; the calmer he became away from her, completely
forgetting her, the more agonizing became both her sufferings and
his feeling of helplessness before them.  He jumped up, would
have liked to run away, but ran to her.

Sometimes, when again and again she called upon him, he blamed
her; but seeing her patient, smiling face, and hearing the words,
"I am worrying you," he threw the blame on God; but thinking of
God, at once he fell to beseeching God to forgive him and have
mercy.




Chapter 15


He did not know whether it was late or early.  The candles had
all burned out.  Dolly had just been in the study and had
suggested to the doctor that he should lie down.  Levin sat
listening to the doctor's stories of a quack mesmerizer and
looking at the ashes of his cigarette.  There had been a period
of repose, and he had sunk into oblivion.  He had completely
forgotten what was going on now.  He heard the doctor's chat and
understood it.  Suddenly there came an unearthly shriek.  The
shriek was so awful that Levin did not even jump up, but holding
his breath, gazed in terrified inquiry at the doctor.  The doctor
put his head on one side, listened, and smiled approvingly.
Everything was so extraordinary that nothing could strike Levin
as strange.  "I suppose it must be so," he thought, and still sat
where he was.  Whose scream was this?  He jumped up, ran on
tiptoe to the bedroom, edged round Lizaveta Petrovna and the
princess, and took up his position at Kitty's pillow.  The scream
had subsided, but there was some change now.  What it was he did
not see and did not comprehend, and he had no wish to see or
comprehend.  But he saw it by the face of Lizaveta Petrovna.
Lizaveta Petrovna's face was stern and pale, and still as
resolute, though her jaws were twitching, and her eyes were fixed
intently on Kitty.  Kitty's swollen and agonized face, a tress of
hair clinging to her moist brow, was turned to him and sought his
eyes.  Her lifted hands asked for his hands.  Clutching his chill
hands in her moist ones, she began squeezing them to her face.

"Don't go, don't go!  I'm not afraid, I'm not afraid!" she said
rapidly.  "Mamma, take my earrings.  They bother me.  You're not
afraid?  Quick, quick, Lizaveta Petrovna..."

She spoke quickly, very quickly, and tried to smile.  But
suddenly her face was drawn, she pushed him away.

"Oh, this is awful!  I'm dying, I'm dying!  Go away!" she
shrieked, and again he heard that unearthly scream.

Levin clutched at his head and ran out of the room.

"It's nothing, it's nothing, it's all right," Dolly called after
him.

But they might say what they liked, he knew now that all was
over.  He stood in the next room, his head leaning against the
door post, and heard shrieks, howls such as he had never heard
before, and he knew that what had been Kitty was uttering these
shrieks.  He had long ago ceased to wish for the child.  By now
he loathed this child.  He did not even wish for her life now,
all he longed for was the end of this awful anguish.

"Doctor! What is it?  What is it?  By God!" he said, snatching at
the doctor's hand as he came up.

"It's the end," said the doctor.  And the doctor's face was so
grave as he said it that Levin took _the end_ as meaning her death.

Beside himself, he ran into the bedroom.  The first thing he saw
was the face of Lizaveta Petrovna.  It was even more frowning and
stern.  Kitty's face he did not know.  In the place where it had
been was something that was fearful in its strained distortion
and in the sounds that came from it.  He fell down with his head
on the wooden framework of the bed, feeling that his heart was
bursting.  The awful scream never paused, it became still more
awful, and as though it had reached the utmost limit of terror,
suddenly it ceased.  Levin could not believe his ears, but there
could be no doubt; the scream had ceased and he heard a subdued
stir and bustle, and hurried breathing, and her voice, gasping,
alive, tender, and blissful, uttered softly, "It's over!"

He lifted his head.  With her hands hanging exhausted on the
quilt, looking extraordinarily lovely and serene, she looked at
him in silence and tried to smile, and could not.

And suddenly, from the mysterious and awful far-away world in
which he had been living for the last twenty-two hours, Levin
felt himself all in an instant borne back to the old every-day
world, glorified though now, by such a radiance of happiness that
he could not bear it.  The strained chords snapped, sobs and
tears of joy which he had never foreseen rose up with such
violence that his whole body shook, that for long they prevented
him from speaking.

Falling on his knees before the bed, he held his wife's hand
before his lips and kissed it, and the hand, with a weak movement
of the fingers, responded to his kiss.  And meanwhile, there at
the foot of the bed, in the deft hands of Lizaveta Petrovna, like
a flickering light in a lamp, lay the life of a human creature,
which had never existed before, and which would now with the same
right, with the same importance to itself, live and create in its
own image.

"Alive! alive!  And a boy too!  Set your mind at rest!" Levin
heard Lizaveta Petrovna saying, as she slapped the baby's back
with a shaking hand.

"Mamma, is it true?" said Kitty's voice.

The princess's sobs were all the answers she could make.  And in
the midst of the silence there came in unmistakable reply to the
mother's question, a voice quite unlike the subdued voices
speaking in the room.  It was the bold, clamorous, self-assertive
squall of the new human being, who had so incomprehensibly
appeared.

If Levin had been told before that Kitty was dead, and that he
had died with her, and that their children were angels, and that
God was standing before him, he would have been surprised at
nothing.  But now, coming back to the world of reality, he had to
make great mental efforts to take in that she was alive and well,
and that the creature squalling so desperately was his son.
Kitty was alive, her agony was over.  And he was unutterably
happy.  That he understood; he was completely happy in it.  But
the baby?  Whence, why, who was he?...  He could not get used to
the idea.  It seemed to him something extraneous, superfluous, to
which he could not accustom himself.



Chapter 16


At ten o'clock the old prince, Sergey Ivanovitch, and Stepan
Arkadyevitch were sitting at Levin's.  Having inquired after
Kitty, they had dropped into conversation upon other subjects.
Levin heard them, and unconsciously, as they talked, going over
the past, over what had been up to that morning, he thought of
himself as he had been yesterday till that point.  It was as
though a hundred years had passed since then.  He felt himself
exalted to unattainable heights, from which he studiously lowered
himself so as not to wound the people he was talking to.  He
talked, and was all the time thinking of his wife, of her
condition now, of his son, in whose existence he tried to school
himself into believing.  The whole world of woman, which had
taken for him since his marriage a new value he had never
suspected before, was now so exalted that he could not take it in
in his imagination.  He heard them talk of yesterday's dinner at
the club, and thought: "What is happening with her now?  Is she
asleep?  How is she?  What is she thinking of?  Is he crying, my
son Dmitri?"  And in the middle of the conversation, in the
middle of a sentence, he jumped up and went out of the room.

"Send me word if I can see her," said the prince.

"Very well, in a minute," answered Levin, and without stopping,
he went to her room.

She was not asleep, she was talking gently with her mother,
making plans about the christening.

Carefully set to rights, with hair well-brushed, in a smart
little cap with some blue in it, her arms out on the quilt, she
was lying on her back.  Meeting his eyes, her eyes drew him to
her.  Her face, bright before, brightened still more as he drew
near her.  There was the same change in it from earthly to
unearthly that is seen in the face of the dead.  But then it
means farewell, here it meant welcome.  Again a rush of emotion,
such as he had felt at the moment of the child's birth, flooded
his heart.  She took his hand and asked him if he had slept.  He
could not answer, and turned away, struggling with his weakness.

"I have had a nap, Kostya!" she said to him; "and I am so
comfortable now."

She looked at him, but suddenly her expression changed.

"Give him to me," she said, hearing the baby's cry.  "Give him to
me, Lizaveta Petrovna, and he shall look at him."

"To be sure, his papa shall look at him," said Lizaveta Petrovna,
getting up and bringing something red, and queer, and wriggling.
"Wait a minute, we'll make him tidy first," and Lizaveta
Petrovna laid the red wobbling thing on the bed, began untrussing
and trussing up the baby, lifting it up and turning it over with
one finger and powdering it with something.

Levin, looking at the tiny, pitiful creature, made strenuous
efforts to discover in his heart some traces of fatherly feeling
for it.  He felt nothing towards it but disgust.  But when it was
undressed and he caught a glimpse of wee, wee, little hands,
little feet, saffron-colored, with little toes, too, and
positively with a little big toe different from the rest, and
when he saw Lizaveta Petrovna closing the wide-open little hands,
as though they were soft springs, and putting them into linen
garments, such pity for the little creature came upon him, and
such terror that she would hurt it, that he held her hand back.

Lizaveta Petrovna laughed.

"Don't be frightened, don't be frightened!"

When the baby had been put to rights and transformed into a firm
doll, Lizaveta Petrovna dandled it as though proud of her
handiwork, and stood a little away so that Levin might see his
son in all his glory.

Kitty looked sideways in the same direction, never taking her
eyes off the baby.  "Give him to me! give him to me!" she said,
and even made as though she would sit up.

"What are you thinking of, Katerina Alexandrovna, you mustn't
move like that!  Wait a minute.  I'll give him to you.  Here
we're showing papa what a fine fellow we are!"

And Lizaveta Petrovna, with one hand supporting the wobbling
head, lifted up on the other arm the strange, limp, red creature,
whose head was lost in its swaddling clothes.  But it had a nose,
too, and slanting eyes and smacking lips.

"A splendid baby!" said Lizaveta Petrovna.

Levin sighed with mortification.  This splendid baby excited in
him no feeling but disgust and compassion.  It was not at all the
feeling he had looked forward to.

He turned away while Lizaveta Petrovna put the baby to the
unaccustomed breast.

Suddenly laughter made him look round.  The baby had taken the
breast.

"Come, that's enough, that's enough!" said Lizaveta Petrovna, but
Kitty would not let the baby go.  He fell asleep in her arms.

"Look, now," said Kitty, turning the baby so that he could see
it.  The aged-looking little face suddenly puckered up still more
and the baby sneezed.

Smiling, hardly able to restrain his tears, Levin kissed his wife
and went out of the dark room.  What he felt towards this little
creature was utterly unlike what he had expected.  There was
nothing cheerful and joyous in the feeling; on the contrary, it
was a new torture of apprehension.  It was the consciousness of a
new sphere of liability to pain.  And this sense was so painful
at first, the apprehension lest this helpless creature should
suffer was so intense, that it prevented him from noticing the
strange thrill of senseless joy and even pride that he had felt
when the baby sneezed.



Chapter 17


Stepan Arkadyevitch's affairs were in a very bad way.

The money for two-thirds of the forest had all been spent
already, and he had borrowed from the merchant in advance at ten
per cent discount, almost all the remaining third.  The  merchant
would not give more, especially as Darya Alexandrovna, for the
first time that winter insisting on her right to her own
property, had refused to sign the receipt for the payment of the
last third of the forest.  All his salary went on household
expenses and in payment of petty debts that could not be put off.
There was positively no money.

This was unpleasant and awkward, and in Stepan Arkadyevitch's
opinion things could not go on like this.  The explanation of the
position was, in his view, to be found in the fact that his
salary was too small.  The post he filled had been unmistakably
very good five years ago, but it was so no longer.

Petrov, the bank director, had twelve thousand; Sventitsky, a
company director, had seventeen thousand; Mitin, who had founded
a bank, received fifty thousand.

"Clearly I've been napping, and they've overlooked me," Stepan
Arkadyevitch thought about himself.  And he began keeping his
eyes and ears open, and towards the end of the winter he had
discovered a very good berth and had formed a plan of attack upon
it, at first from Moscow through aunts, uncles, and friends, and
then, when the matter was well advanced, in the spring, he went
himself to Petersburg.  It was one of those snug, lucrative
berths of which there are so many more nowadays than there used
to be, with incomes ranging from one thousand to fifty thousand
roubles.  It was the post of secretary of the committee of the
amalgamated agency of the southern railways, and of certain
banking companies.  This position, like all such appointments,
called for such immense energy and such varied qualifications,
that it was difficult for them to be found united in any one man.
And since a man combining all the qualifications was not to be
found, it was at least better that the post be filled by an
honest than by a dishonest man.  And Stepan Arkadyevitch was not
merely an honest man--unemphatically--in the common acceptation
of the words, he was an honest man--emphatically--in that special
sense which the word has in Moscow, when they talk of an "honest"
politician, an "honest" writer, an "honest" newspaper, an
"honest" institution, an "honest" tendency, meaning not simply
that the man or the institution is not dishonest, but that they
are capable on occasion of taking a line of their own in
opposition to the authorities.

Stepan Arkadyevitch moved in those circles in Moscow in which
that expression had come into use, was regarded there as an
honest man, and so had more right to this appointment than
others.

The appointment yielded an income of from seven to ten thousand a
year, and Oblonsky could fill it without giving up his government
position.  It was in the hands of two ministers, one lady, and
two Jews, and all these people, though the way had been paved
already with them, Stepan Arkadyevitch had to see in Petersburg.
Besides this business, Stepan Arkadyevitch had promised his
sister Anna to obtain from Karenin a definite answer on the
question of divorce.  And begging fifty roubles from Dolly, he
set off for Petersburg.

Stepan Arkadyevitch sat in Karenin's study listening to his
report on the causes of the unsatisfactory position of Russian
finance, and only waiting for the moment when he would finish to
speak about his own business or about Anna.

"Yes, that's very true," he said, when Alexey Alexandrovitch took
off the pince-nez, without which he could not read now, and
looked inquiringly at his former brother-in-law, "that's very
true in particular cases, but still the principle of our day is
freedom."

"Yes, but I lay down another principle, embracing the principle
of freedom," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, with emphasis on the
word "embracing," and he put on his pince-nez again, so as to
read the passage in which this statement was made.  And turning
over the beautifully written, wide-margined manuscript, Alexey
Alexandrovitch read aloud over again the conclusive passage.

"I don't advocate protection for the sake of private interests,
but for the public weal, and for the lower and upper classes
equally," he said, looking over his pince-nez at Oblonsky.  "But
_they_ cannot grasp that, _they_ are taken up now with personal
interests, and carried away by phrases."

Stepan Arkadyevitch knew that when Karenin began to talk of what
_they_ were doing and thinking, the persons who would not accept
his report and were the cause of everything wrong in Russia, that
it was coming near the end.  And so now he eagerly abandoned the
principle of free-trade, and fully agreed.  Alexey Alexandrovitch
paused, thoughtfully turning over the pages of his manuscript.

"Oh, by the way," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, "I wanted to ask
you, some time when you see Pomorsky, to drop him a hint that I
should be very glad to get that new appointment of secretary of
the committee of the amalgamated agency of the southern railways
and banking companies."  Stepan Arkadyevitch was familiar by now
with the title of the post he coveted, and he brought it out
rapidly without mistake.

Alexey Alexandrovitch questioned him as to the duties of this new
committee, and pondered.  He was considering whether the new
committee would not be acting in some way contrary to the views
he had been advocating.  But as the influence of the new
committee was of a very complex nature, and his views were of
very wide application, he could not decide this straight off, and
taking off his pince-nez, he said:

"Of course, I can mention it to him; but what is your reason
precisely for wishing to obtain the appointment?"

"It's a good salary, rising to nine thousand, and my means..."

"Nine thousand!" repeated Alexey Alexandrovitch, and he frowned.
The high figure of the salary made him reflect that on that side
Stepan Arkadyevitch's proposed position ran counter to the main
tendency of his own projects of reform, which always leaned
towards economy.

"I consider, and I have embodied my views in a note on the
subject, that in our day these immense salaries are evidence of
the unsound economic _assiette_ of our finances."

"But what's to be done?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "Suppose a
bank director gets ten thousand--well, he's worth it; or an
engineer gets twenty thousand--after all, it's a growing thing,
you know!"

"I assume that a salary is the price paid for a commodity, and it
ought to conform with the law of supply and demand.  If the
salary is fixed without any regard for that law, as, for
instance, when I see two engineers leaving college together, both
equally well trained and efficient, and one getting forty
thousand while the other is satisfied with two; or when I see
lawyers and hussars, having no special qualifications, appointed
directors of banking companies with immense salaries, I conclude
that the salary is not fixed in accordance with the law of supply
and demand, but simply through personal interest.  And this is an
abuse of great gravity in itself, and one that reacts injuriously
on the government service.  I consider..."

Stepan Arkadyevitch made haste to interrupt his brother-in-law.

"Yes; but you must agree that it's a new institution of undoubted
utility that's being started.  After all, you know, it's a
growing thing!  What they lay particular stress on is the thing
being carried on honestly," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with
emphasis.

But the Moscow significance of the word "honest" was lost on
Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Honesty is only a negative qualification," he said.

"Well, you'll do me a great service, anyway," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, "by putting in a word to Pomorsky--just in the way
of conversation...."

"But I fancy it's more in Volgarinov's hands," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch.

"Volgarinov has fully assented, as far as he's concerned," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, turning red.  Stepan Arkadyevitch reddened
at the mention of that name, because he had been that morning at
the Jew Volgarinov's, and the visit had left an unpleasant
recollection.

Stepan Arkadyevitch believed most positively that the committee
in which he was trying to get an appointment was a new, genuine,
and honest public body, but that morning when Volgarinov had--
intentionally, beyond a doubt--kept him two hours waiting with
other petitioners in his waiting room, he had suddenly felt
uneasy.

Whether he was uncomfortable that he, a descendant of Rurik,
Prince Oblonsky, had been kept for two hours waiting to see a
Jew, or that for the first time in his life he was not following
the example of his ancestors in serving the government, but was
turning off into a new career, anyway he was very uncomfortable.
During those two hours in Volgarinov's waiting room Stepan
Arkadyevitch, stepping jauntily about the room, pulling his
whiskers, entering into conversation with the other petitioners,
and inventing an epigram on his position, assiduously concealed
from others, and even from himself, the feeling he was
experiencing.

But all the time he was uncomfortable and angry, he could not
have said why--whether because he could not get his epigram just
right, or from some other reason.  When at last Volgarinov had
received him with exaggerated politeness and unmistakable triumph
at his humiliation, and had all but refused the favor asked of
him, Stepan Arkadyevitch had made haste to forget it all as soon
as possible.  And now, at the mere recollection, he blushed.



Chapter 18


"Now there is something I want to talk about, and you know what
it is.  About Anna," Stepan Arkadyevitch said, pausing for a
brief space, and shaking off the unpleasant impression.

As soon as Oblonsky uttered Anna's name, the face of Alexey
Alexandrovitch was completely transformed; all the life was gone
out of it, and it looked weary and dead.

"What is it exactly that you want from me?" he said, moving in
his chair and snapping his pince-nez.

"A definite settlement, Alexey Alexandrovitch, some settlement of
the position.  I'm appealing to you" ("not as an injured
husband," Stepan Arkadyevitch was going to say, but afraid of
wrecking his negotiation by this, he changed the words) "not as a
statesman" (which did not sound _à propos_), "but simply as a man,
and a good-hearted man and a Christian.  You must have pity on
her," he said.

"That is, in what way precisely?" Karenin said softly.

"Yes, pity on her.  If you had seen her as I have!--I have been
spending all the winter with her--you would have pity on her.
Her position is awful, simply awful!"

"I had imagined," answered Alexey Alexandrovitch in a higher,
almost shrill voice, "that Anna Arkadyevna had everything she had
desired for herself."

"Oh, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for heaven's sake, don't let us
indulge in recriminations!  What is past is past, and you know
what she wants and is waiting for--divorce."

"But I believe Anna Arkadyevna refuses a divorce, if I make it a
condition to leave me my son.  I replied in that sense, and
supposed that the matter was ended.  I consider it at an end,"
shrieked Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"But, for heaven's sake, don't get hot!" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, touching his brother-in-law's knee.  "The matter is
not ended.  If you will allow me to recapitulate, it was like
this: when you parted, you were as magnanimous as could possibly
be; you were ready to give her everything--freedom, divorce even.
She appreciated that.  No, don't think that.  She did appreciate
it--to such a degree that at the first moment, feeling how she
had wronged you, she did not consider and could not consider
everything.  She gave up everything.  But experience, time, have
shown that her position is unbearable, impossible."

"The life of Anna Arkadyevna can have no interest for me," Alexey
Alexandrovitch put in, lifting his eyebrows.

"Allow me to disbelieve that," Stepan Arkadyevitch replied
gently.  "Her position is intolerable for her, and of no benefit
to anyone whatever.  She has deserved it, you will say.  She
knows that and asks you for nothing; she says plainly that she
dare not ask you.  But I, all of us, her relatives, all who love
her, beg you, entreat you.  Why should she suffer?  Who is any
the better for it?"

"Excuse me, you seem to put me in the position of the guilty
party," observed Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Oh, no, oh, no, not at all! please understand me," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, touching his hand again, as though feeling sure
this physical contact would soften his brother-in-law.  "All I
say is this: her position is intolerable, and it might be
alleviated by you, and you will lose nothing by it.  I will
arrange it all for you, so that you'll not notice it.  You did
promise it, you know."

"The promise was given before.  And I had supposed that the
question of my son had settled the matter.  Besides, I had hoped
that Anna Arkadyevna had enough generosity..." Alexey
Alexandrovitch articulated with difficulty, his lips twitching
and his face white.

"She leaves it all to your generosity.  She begs, she implores
one thing of you--to extricate her from the impossible position
in which she is placed.  She does not ask for her son now.
Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are a good man.  Put yourself in her
position for a minute.  The question of divorce for her in her
position is a question of life and death.  If you had not
promised it once, she would have reconciled herself to her
position, she would have gone on living in the country.  But you
promised it, and she wrote to you, and moved to Moscow.  And here
she's been for six months in Moscow, where every chance meeting
cuts her to the heart, every day expecting an answer.  Why, it's
like keeping a condemned criminal for six months with the rope
round his neck, promising him perhaps death, perhaps mercy.  Have
pity on her, and I will undertake to arrange everything.  _Vos
scrupules_..."

"I am not talking about that, about that..." Alexey
Alexandrovitch interrupted with disgust.  "But, perhaps, I
promised what I had no right to promise."

"So you go back from your promise?"

"I have never refused to do all that is possible, but I want time
to consider how much of what I promised is possible."

"No, Alexey Alexandrovitch!" cried Oblonsky, jumping up, "I won't
believe that!  She's unhappy as only an unhappy woman can be, and
you cannot refuse in such..."

"As much of what I promised as is possible.  _Vous professez
d'être libre penseur._  But I as a believer cannot, in a matter of
such gravity, act in opposition to the Christian law."

"But in Christian societies and among us, as far as I'm aware,
divorce is allowed," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "Divorce is
sanctioned even by our church.  And we see..."

"It is allowed, but not in the sense..."

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are not like yourself," said
Oblonsky, after a brief pause.  "Wasn't it you (and didn't we all
appreciate it in you?) who forgave everything, and moved simply
by Christian feeling was ready to make any sacrifice?  You said
yourself: if a man take thy coat, give him thy cloak also, and
now..."

"I beg," said Alexey Alexandrovitch shrilly, getting suddenly
onto his feet, his face white and his jaws twitching, "I beg you
to drop this...to drop...this subject!"

"Oh, no!  Oh, forgive me, forgive me if I have wounded you," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, holding out his hand with a smile of
embarrassment; "but like a messenger I have simply performed the
commission given me."

Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, pondered a little, and
said:

"I must think it over and seek for guidance.  The day after
tomorrow I will give you a final answer," he said, after
considering a moment.



Chapter 19


Stepan Arkadyevitch was about to go away when Korney came in to
announce:

"Sergey Alexyevitch!"

"Who's Sergey Alexyevitch?" Stepan Arkadyevitch was beginning,
but he remembered immediately.

"Ah, Seryozha!" he said aloud.  "Sergey Alexyevitch!  I thought it
was the director of a department.  Anna asked me to see him too,"
he thought.

And he recalled the timid, piteous expression with which Anna had
said to him at parting: "Anyway, you will see him.  Find out
exactly where he is, who is looking after him.  And Stiva...if
it were possible!  Could it be possible?" Stepan Arkadyevitch
knew what was meant by that "if it were possible,"--if it were
possible to arrange the divorce so as to let her have her son....
Stepan Arkadyevitch saw now that it was no good to dream of that,
but still he was glad to see his nephew.

Alexey Alexandrovitch reminded his brother-in-law that they never
spoke to the boy of his mother, and he begged him not to mention
a single word about her.

"He was very ill after that interview with his mother, which we
had not foreseen," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.  "Indeed, we
feared for his life.  But with rational treatment, and
sea-bathing in the summer, he regained his strength, and now, by
the doctor's advice, I have let him go to school.  And certainly
the companionship of school has had a good effect on him, and he
is perfectly well, and making good progress."

"What a fine fellow he's grown!  He's not Seryozha now, but quite
full-fledged Sergey Alexyevitch!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
smiling, as he looked at the handsome, broad-shouldered lad in
blue coat and long trousers, who walked in alertly and
confidently.  The boy looked healthy and good-humored.  He bowed
to his uncle as to a stranger, but recognizing him, he blushed
and turned hurriedly away from him, as though offended and
irritated at something.  The boy went up to his father and handed
him a note of the marks he had gained in school.

"Well, that's very fair," said his father, "you can go."

"He's thinner and taller, and has grown out of being a child into
a boy; I like that," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.  "Do you remember
me?"

The boy looked back quickly at his uncle.

"Yes, _mon oncle_," he answered, glancing at his father, and
again he looked downcast.

His uncle called him to him, and took his hand.

"Well, and how are you getting on?" he said, wanting to talk to
him, and not knowing what to say.

The boy, blushing and making no answer, cautiously drew his hand
away.  As soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch let go his hand, he glanced
doubtfully at his father, and like a bird set free, he darted out
of the room.

A year had passed since the last time Seryozha had seen his
mother.  Since then he had heard nothing more of her.  And in the
course of that year he had gone to school, and made friends among
his schoolfellows.  The dreams and memories of his mother, which
had made him ill after seeing her, did not occupy his thoughts
now.  When they came back to him, he studiously drove them away,
regarding them as shameful and girlish, below the dignity of a
boy and a schoolboy.  He knew that his father and mother were
separated by some quarrel, he knew that he had to remain with his
father, and he tried to get used to that idea.

He disliked seeing his uncle, so like his mother, for it called
up those memories of which he was ashamed.  He disliked it all
the more as from some words he had caught as he waited at the
study door, and still more from the faces of his father and
uncle, he guessed that they must have been talking of his mother.
And to avoid condemning the father with whom he lived and on whom
he was dependent, and, above all, to avoid giving way to
sentimentality, which he considered so degrading, Seryozha tried
not to look at his uncle who had come to disturb his peace of
mind, and not to think of what he recalled to him.

But when Stepan Arkadyevitch, going out after him, saw him on the
stairs, and calling to him, asked him how he spent his playtime
at school, Seryozha talked more freely to him away from his
father's presence.

"We have a railway now," he said in answer to his uncle's
question.  "It's like this, do you see: two sit on a bench--
they're the passengers; and one stands up straight on the bench.
And all are harnessed to it by their arms or by their belts, and
they run through all the rooms--the doors are left open
beforehand.  Well, and it's pretty hard work being the
conductor!"

"That's the one that stands?" Stepan Arkadyevitch inquired,
smiling.

"Yes, you want pluck for it, and cleverness too, especially when
they stop all of a sudden, or someone falls down."

"Yes, that must be a serious matter," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
watching with mournful interest the eager eyes, like his
mother's; not childish now--no longer fully innocent.  And though
he had promised Alexey Alexandrovitch not to speak of Anna, he
could not restrain himself.

"Do you remember your mother?" he asked suddenly.

"No, I don't," Seryozha said quickly.  He blushed crimson, and
his face clouded over.  And his uncle could get nothing more out
of him.  His tutor found his pupil on the staircase half an hour
later, and for a long while he could not make out whether he was
ill-tempered or crying.

"What is it? I expect you hurt yourself when you fell down?"
said the tutor.  "I told you it was a dangerous game.  And we
shall have to speak to the director."

"If I had hurt myself, nobody should have found it out, that's
certain."

"Well, what is it, then?"

"Leave me alone!  If I remember, or if I don't remember?...what
business is it of his?  Why should I remember?  Leave me in
peace!" he said, addressing not his tutor, but the whole world.



Chapter 20


Stepan Arkadyevitch, as usual, did not waste his time in
Petersburg.  In Petersburg, besides business, his sister's
divorce, and his coveted appointment, he wanted, as he always
did, to freshen himself up, as he said, after the mustiness of
Moscow.

In spite of its _cafés chantants_ and its omnibuses, Moscow was
yet a stagnant bog.  Stepan Arkadyevitch always felt it.  After
living for some time in Moscow, especially in close relations
with his family, he was conscious of a depression of spirits.
After being a long time in Moscow without a change, he reached a
point when he positively began to be worrying himself over his
wife's ill-humor and reproaches, over his children's health and
education, and the petty details of his official work; even the
fact of being in debt worried him.  But he had only to go and
stay a little while in Petersburg, in the circle there in which
he moved, where people lived--really lived--instead of vegetating
as in Moscow, and all such ideas vanished and melted away at
once, like wax before the fire.  His wife?...  Only that day he
had been talking to Prince Tchetchensky.  Prince Tchetchensky had
a wife and family, grown-up pages in the corps,...and he had
another illegitimate family of children also.  Though the first
family was very nice too, Prince Tchetchensky felt happier in his
second family; and he used to take his eldest son with him to
his second family, and told Stepan Arkadyevitch that he thought
it good for his son, enlarging his ideas.  What would have been
said to that in Moscow?

His children?  In Petersburg children did not prevent their
parents from enjoying life.  The children were brought up in
schools, and there was no trace of the wild idea that prevailed
in Moscow, in Lvov's household, for instance, that all the
luxuries of life were for the children, while the parents have
nothing but work and anxiety.  Here people understood that a man
is in duty bound to live for himself, as every man of culture
should live.

His official duties?  Official work here was not the stiff,
hopeless drudgery that it was in Moscow.  Here there was some
interest in official life.  A chance meeting, a service rendered,
a happy phrase, a knack of facetious mimicry, and a man's career
might be made in a trice.  So it had been with Bryantsev, whom
Stepan Arkadyevitch had met the previous day, and who was one of
the highest functionaries in government now.  There was some
interest in official work like that.

The Petersburg attitude on pecuniary matters had an especially
soothing effect on Stepan Arkadyevitch.  Bartnyansky, who must
spend at least fifty thousand to judge by the style he lived in,
had made an interesting comment the day before on that subject.

As they were talking before dinner, Stepan Arkadyevitch said to
Bartnyansky:

"You're friendly, I fancy, with Mordvinsky; you might do me a
favor: say a word to him, please, for me.  There's an appointment
I should like to get--secretary of the agency..."

"Oh, I shan't remember all that, if you tell it to me....  But
what possesses you to have to do with railways and Jews?...  Take
it as you will, it's a low business."

Stepan Arkadyevitch did not say to Bartnyansky that it was a
"growing thing"--Bartnyansky would not have understood that.

"I want the money, I've nothing to live on."

"You're living, aren't you?"

"Yes, but in debt."

"Are you, though?  Heavily?" said Bartnyansky sympathetically.

"Very heavily: twenty thousand."

Bartnyansky broke into good-humored laughter.

"Oh, lucky fellow!" said he.  "My debts mount up to a million and
a half, and I've nothing, and still I can live, as you see!"

And Stepan Arkadyevitch saw the correctness of this view not in
words only but in actual fact.  Zhivahov owed three hundred
thousand, and hadn't a farthing to bless himself with, and he
lived, and in style too!  Count Krivtsov was considered a
hopeless case by everyone, and yet he kept two mistresses.
Petrovsky had run through five millions, and still lived in just
the same style, and was even a manager in the financial
department with a salary of twenty thousand.  But besides this,
Petersburg had physically an agreeable effect on Stepan
Arkadyevitch.  It made him younger.  In Moscow he sometimes found
a gray hair in his head, dropped asleep after dinner, stretched,
walked slowly upstairs, breathing heavily, was bored by the
society of young women, and did not dance at balls.  In
Petersburg he always felt ten years younger.

His experience in Petersburg was exactly what had been described
to him on the previous day by Prince Pyotr Oblonsky, a man of
sixty, who had just come back from abroad:

"We don't know the way to live here," said Pyotr Oblonsky.  "I
spent the summer in Baden, and you wouldn't believe it, I felt
quite a young man.  At a glimpse of a pretty woman, my
thoughts....  One dines and drinks a glass of wine, and feels
strong and ready for anything.  I came home to Russia--had to see
my wife, and, what's more, go to my country place; and there,
you'd hardly believe it, in a fortnight I'd got into a dressing
gown and given up dressing for dinner.  Needn't say I had no
thoughts left for pretty women.  I became quite an old gentleman.
There was nothing left for me but to think of my eternal
salvation.  I went off to Paris--I was as right as could be at
once."

Stepan Arkadyevitch felt exactly the difference that Pyotr
Oblonsky described.  In Moscow he degenerated so much that if he
had had to be there for long together, he might in good earnest
have come to considering his salvation; in Petersburg he felt
himself a man of the world again.

Between Princess Betsy Tverskaya and Stepan Arkadyevitch there
had long existed rather curious relations.  Stepan Arkadyevitch
always flirted with her in jest, and used to say to her, also in
jest, the most unseemly things, knowing that nothing delighted
her so much.  The day after his conversation with Karenin, Stepan
Arkadyevitch went to see her, and felt so youthful that in this
jesting flirtation and nonsense he recklessly went so far that he
did not know how to extricate himself, as unluckily he was so far
from being attracted by her that he thought her positively
disagreeable.  What made it hard to change the conversation was
the fact that he was very attractive to her.  So that he was
considerably relieved at the arrival of Princess Myakaya, which
cut short their _tête-à-tête_.

"Ah, so you're here!" said she when she saw him.  "Well, and what
news of your poor sister?  You needn't look at me like that," she
added.  "Ever since they've all turned against her, all those
who're a thousand times worse than she, I've thought she did a
very fine thing.  I can't forgive Vronsky for not letting me know
when she was in Petersburg.  I'd have gone to see her and gone
about with her everywhere.  Please give her my love.  Come, tell
me about her."

"Yes, her position is very difficult; she..." began Stepan
Arkadyevitch, in the simplicity of his heart accepting as
sterling coin Princess Myakaya's words "tell me about her."
Princess Myakaya interrupted him immediately, as she always did,
and began talking herself.

"She's done what they all do, except me--only they hide it.  But
she wouldn't be deceitful, and she did a fine thing.  And she did
better still in throwing up that crazy brother-in-law of yours.
You must excuse me.  Everybody used to say he was so clever, so
very clever; I was the only one that said he was a fool.  Now
that he's so thick with Lidia Ivanovna and Landau, they all say
he's crazy, and I should prefer not to agree with everybody, but
this time I can't help it."

"Oh, do please explain," said Stepan Arkadyevitch; "what does it
mean?  Yesterday I was seeing him on my sister's behalf, and I
asked him to give me a final answer.  He gave me no answer, and
said he would think it over.  But this morning, instead of an
answer, I received an invitation from Countess Lidia Ivanovna
for this evening."

"Ah, so that's it, that's it!" said Princess Myakaya gleefully,
"they're going to ask Landau what he's to say."

"Ask Landau?  What for?  Who or what's Landau?"

"What! you don't know Jules Landau, _le fameux Jules Landau,
le clairvoyant_?  He's crazy too, but on him your sister's fate
depends.  See what comes of living in the provinces--you know
nothing about anything.  Landau, do you see, was a _commis_ in
a shop in Paris, and he went to a doctor's; and in the doctor's
waiting room he fell asleep, and in his sleep he began giving
advice to all the patients.  And wonderful advice it was!  Then
the wife of Yury Meledinsky--you know, the invalid?--heard of
this Landau, and had him to see her husband.  And he cured her
husband, though I can't say that I see he did him much good, for
he's just as feeble a creature as ever he was, but they believed
in him, and took him along with them and brought him to Russia.
Here there's been a general rush to him, and he's begun doctoring
everyone.  He cured Countess Bezzubova, and she took such a fancy
to him that she adopted him."

"Adopted him?"

"Yes, as her son.  He's not Landau any more now, but Count
Bezzubov.  That's neither here nor there, though; but Lidia--I'm
very fond of her, but she has a screw loose somewhere--has lost
her heart to this Landau now, and nothing is settled now in her
house or Alexey Alexandrovitch's without him, and so your
sister's fate is now in the hands of Landau, _alias_ Count
Bezzubov."



Chapter 21


After a capital dinner and a great deal of cognac drunk at
Bartnyansky's, Stepan Arkadyevitch, only a little later than the
appointed time, went in to Countess Lidia Ivanovna's.

"Who else is with the countess?--a Frenchman?" Stepan
Arkadyevitch asked the hall porter, as he glanced at the familiar
overcoat of Alexey Alexandrovitch and a queer, rather
artless-looking overcoat with clasps.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin and Count Bezzubov," the porter
answered severely.

"Princess Myakaya guessed right," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch, as
he went upstairs.  "Curious!  It would be quite as well, though,
to get on friendly terms with her.  She has immense influence.
If she would say a word to Pomorsky, the thing would be a
certainty."

It was still quite light out-of-doors, but in Countess Lidia
Ivanovna's little drawing room the blinds were drawn and the
lamps lighted.  At a round table under a lamp sat the countess
and Alexey Alexandrovitch, talking softly.  A short, thinnish
man, very pale and handsome, with feminine hips and knock-kneed
legs, with fine brilliant eyes and long hair lying on the collar
of his coat, was standing at the end of the room gazing at the
portraits on the wall.  After greeting the lady of the house and
Alexey Alexandrovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch could not resist
glancing once more at the unknown man.

"Monsieur Landau!" the countess addressed him with a softness and
caution that impressed Oblonsky.  And she introduced them.

Landau looked round hurriedly, came up, and smiling, laid his
moist, lifeless hand in Stepan Arkadyevitch's outstretched hand
and immediately walked away and fell to gazing at the portraits
again.  The countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch looked at each
other significantly.

"I am very glad to see you, particularly today," said Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, pointing Stepan Arkadyevitch to a seat beside
Karenin.

"I introduced you to him as Landau," she said in a soft voice,
glancing at the Frenchman and again immediately after at Alexey
Alexandrovitch, "but he is really Count Bezzubov, as you're
probably aware.  Only he does not like the title."

"Yes, I heard so," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch; "they say he
completely cured Countess Bezzubova."

"She was here today, poor thing!" the countess said, turning to
Alexey Alexandrovitch.  "This separation is awful for her.  It's
such a blow to her!"

"And he positively is going?" queried Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Yes, he's going to Paris.  He heard a voice yesterday," said
Countess Lidia Ivanovna, looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Ah, a voice!" repeated Oblonsky, feeling that he must be as
circumspect as he possibly could in this society, where something
peculiar was going on, or was to go on, to which he had not the
key.

A moment's silence followed, after which Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
as though approaching the main topic of conversation, said with a
fine smile to Oblonsky:

"I've known you for a long while, and am very glad to make a
closer acquaintance with you.  _Les amis de nos amis sont nos
amis._  But to be a true friend, one must enter into the spiritual
state of one's friend, and I fear that you are not doing so in
the case of Alexey Alexandrovitch.  You understand what I mean?"
she said, lifting her fine pensive eyes.

"In part, countess, I understand the position of Alexey
Alexandrovitch..." said Oblonsky.  Having no clear idea what they
were talking about, he wanted to confine himself to generalities.

"The change is not in his external position," Countess Lidia
Ivanovna said sternly, following with eyes of love the figure of
Alexey Alexandrovitch as he got up and crossed over to Landau;
"his heart is changed, a new heart has been vouchsafed him, and
I fear you don't fully apprehend the change that has taken place
in him."

"Oh, well, in general outlines I can conceive the change.  We
have always been friendly, and now..." said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
responding with a sympathetic glance to the expression of the
countess, and mentally balancing the question with which of the
two ministers she was most intimate, so as to know about which to
ask her to speak for him.

"The change that has taken place in him cannot lessen his love
for his neighbors; on the contrary, that change can only
intensify love in his heart.  But I am afraid you do not
understand me.  Won't you have some tea?" she said, with her eyes
indicating the footman, who was handing round tea on a tray.

"Not quite, countess.  Of course, his misfortune..."

"Yes, a misfortune which has proved the highest happiness, when
his heart was made new, was filled full of it," she said, gazing
with eyes full of love at Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"I do believe I might ask her to speak to both of them," thought
Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Oh, of course, countess," he said; "but I imagine such changes
are a matter so private that no one, even the most intimate
friend, would care to speak of them."

"On the contrary!  We ought to speak freely and help one
another."

"Yes, undoubtedly so, but there is such a difference of
convictions, and besides..." said Oblonsky with a soft smile.

"There can be no difference where it is a question of holy
truth."

"Oh, no, of course; but..." and Stepan Arkadyevitch paused in
confusion.  He understood at last that they were talking of
religion.

"I fancy he will fall asleep immediately," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch in a whisper full of meaning, going up to Lidia
Ivanovna.

Stepan Arkadyevitch looked round.  Landau was sitting at the
window, leaning on his elbow and the back of his chair, his head
drooping.  Noticing that all eyes were turned on him he raised
his head and smiled a smile of childlike artlessness.

"Don't take any notice," said Lidia Ivanovna, and she lightly
moved a chair up for Alexey Alexandrovitch.  "I have observed..."
she was beginning, when a footman came into the room with a
letter.  Lidia Ivanovna rapidly ran her eyes over the note, and
excusing herself, wrote an answer with extraordinary rapidity,
handed it to the man, and came back to the table.  "I have
observed," she went on, "that Moscow people, especially the men,
are more indifferent to religion than anyone."

"Oh, no, countess, I thought Moscow people had the reputation of
being the firmest in the faith," answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"But as far as I can make out, you are unfortunately one of the
indifferent ones," said Alexey Alexandrovitch, turning to him
with a weary smile.

"How anyone can be indifferent!" said Lidia Ivanovna.

"I am not so much indifferent on that subject as I am waiting in
suspense," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his most deprecating
smile.  "I hardly think that the time for such questions has come
yet for me."

Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna looked at each other.

"We can never tell whether the time has come for us or not," said
Alexey Alexandrovitch severely.  "We ought not to think whether
we are ready or not ready.  God's grace is not guided by human
considerations: sometimes it comes not to those that strive for
it, and comes to those that are unprepared, like Saul."

"No, I believe it won't be just yet," said Lidia Ivanovna, who
had been meanwhile watching the movements of the Frenchman.
Landau got up and came to them.

"Do you allow me to listen?" he asked.

"Oh, yes; I did not want to disturb you," said Lidia Ivanovna,
gazing tenderly at him; "sit here with us."

"One has only not to close one's eyes to shut out the light,"
Alexey Alexandrovitch went on.

"Ah, if you knew the happiness we know, feeling His presence ever
in our hearts!" said Countess Lidia Ivanovna with a rapturous
smile.

"But a man may feel himself unworthy sometimes to rise to that
height," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, conscious of hypocrisy in
admitting this religious height, but at the same time unable to
bring himself to acknowledge his free-thinking views before a
person who, by a single word to Pomorsky, might procure him the
coveted appointment.

"That is, you mean that sin keeps him back?" said Lidia Ivanovna.
"But that is a false idea.  There is no sin for believers, their
sin has been atoned for.  _Pardon,_" she added, looking at the
footman, who came in again with another letter.  She read it and
gave a verbal answer: "Tomorrow at the Grand Duchess's, say."
"For the believer sin is not," she went on.

"Yes, but faith without works is dead," said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
recalling the phrase from the catechism, and only by his smile
clinging to his independence.

"There you have it--from the epistle of St. James," said Alexey
Alexandrovitch, addressing Lidia Ivanovna, with a certain
reproachfulness in his tone.  It was unmistakably a subject they
had discussed more than once before.  "What harm has been done by
the false interpretation of that passage!  Nothing holds men back
from belief like that misinterpretation.  'I have not works, so I
cannot believe,' though all the while that is not said.  But the
very opposite is said."

"Striving for God, saving the soul by fasting," said Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, with disgusted contempt, "those are the crude
ideas of our monks....  Yet that is nowhere said.  It is far
simpler and easier," she added, looking at Oblonsky with the same
encouraging smile with which at court she encouraged youthful
maids of honor, disconcerted by the new surroundings of the
court.

"We are saved by Christ who suffered for us.  We are saved by
faith," Alexey Alexandrovitch chimed in, with a glance of
approval at her words.

_"Vous comprenez l'anglais?"_ asked Lidia Ivanovna, and receiving
a reply in the affirmative, she got up and began looking through
a shelf of books.

"I want to read him 'Safe and Happy,' or 'Under the Wing,'" she
said, looking inquiringly at Karenin.  And finding the book, and
sitting down again in her place, she opened it.  "It's very
short.  In it is described the way by which faith can be reached,
and the happiness, above all earthly bliss, with which it fills
the soul.  The believer cannot be unhappy because he is not
alone.  But you will see."  She was just settling herself to read
when the footman came in again.  "Madame Borozdina?  Tell her,
tomorrow at two o'clock.  Yes," she said, putting her finger in
the place in the book, and gazing before her with her fine
pensive eyes, "that is how true faith acts.  You know Marie
Sanina?  You know about her trouble?  She lost her only child.
She was in despair.  And what happened?  She found this
comforter, and she thanks God now for the death of her child.
Such is the happiness faith brings!"

"Oh, yes, that is most..." said Stepan Arkadyevitch, glad they
were going to read, and let him have a chance to collect his
faculties.  "No, I see I'd better not ask her about anything
today," he thought.  "If only I can get out of this without
putting my foot in it!"

"It will be dull for you," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
addressing Landau; "you don't know English, but it's short."

"Oh, I shall understand," said Landau, with the same smile, and
he closed his eyes.  Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna
exchanged meaningful glances, and the reading began.



Chapter 22


Stepan Arkadyevitch felt completely nonplussed by the strange
talk which he was hearing for the first time.  The complexity of
Petersburg, as a rule, had a stimulating effect on him, rousing
him out of his Moscow stagnation.  But he liked these
complications, and understood them only in the circles he knew
and was at home in.  In these unfamiliar surroundings he was
puzzled and disconcerted, and could not get his bearings.  As he
listened to Countess Lidia Ivanovna, aware of the beautiful,
artless--or perhaps artful, he could not decide which--eyes of
Landau fixed upon him, Stepan Arkadyevitch began to be conscious
of a peculiar heaviness in his head.

The most incongruous ideas were in confusion in his head.  "Marie
Sanina is glad her child's dead....  How good a smoke would be
now!...  To be saved, one need only believe, and the monks
don't know how the thing's to be done, but Countess Lidia
Ivanovna does know....  And why is my head so heavy?  Is it the
cognac, or all this being so queer?  Anyway, I fancy I've done
nothing unsuitable so far.  But anyway, it won't do to ask her
now.  They say they make one say one's prayers.  I only hope
they won't make me!  That'll be too imbecile.  And what stuff it
is she's reading! but she has a good accent.  Landau--Bezzubov--
what's he Bezzubov for?"  All at once Stepan Arkadyevitch became
aware that his lower jaw was uncontrollably forming a yawn.  He
pulled his whiskers to cover the yawn, and shook himself
together.  But soon after he became aware that he was dropping
asleep and on the very point of snoring.  He recovered himself at
the very moment when the voice of Countess Lidia Ivanovna was
saying "he's asleep."  Stepan Arkadyevitch started with dismay,
feeling guilty and caught.  But he was reassured at once by
seeing that the words "he's asleep" referred not to him, but to
Landau.  The Frenchman was asleep as well as Stepan Arkadyevitch.
But Stepan Arkadyevitch's being asleep would have offended them,
as he thought (though even this, he thought, might not be so, as
everything seemed so queer), while Landau's being asleep
delighted them extremely, especially Countess Lidia Ivanovna.

_"Mon ami,"_ said Lidia Ivanovna, carefully holding the folds of
her silk gown so as not to rustle, and in her excitement calling
Karenin not Alexey Alexandrovitch, but _"mon ami," "donnez-lui la
main.  Vous voyez?  Sh!"_ she hissed at the footman as he came in
again.  "Not at home."

The Frenchman was asleep, or pretending to be asleep, with his
head on the back of his chair, and his moist hand, as it lay on
his knee, made faint movements, as though trying to catch
something.  Alexey Alexandrovitch got up, tried to move
carefully, but stumbled against the table, went up and laid his
hand in the Frenchman's hand.  Stepan Arkadyevitch got up too,
and opening his eyes wide, trying to wake himself up if he were
asleep, he looked first at one and then at the other.  It was all
real.  Stepan Arkadyevitch felt that his head was getting worse
and worse.

_"Que la personne qui est arrivee la derniere, celle qui demande,
qu'elle sorte!  Qu'elle sorte!"_ articulated the Frenchman,
without opening his eyes.

_"Vous m'excuserez, mais vous voyez....  Revenez vers dix heures,
encore mieux demain."_

_"Qu'elle sorte!"_ repeated the Frenchman impatiently.

_"C'est moi, n'est-ce pas?"_ And receiving an answer in the
affirmative, Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting the favor he had
meant to ask of Lidia Ivanovna, and forgetting his sister's
affairs, caring for nothing, but filled with the sole desire to
get away as soon as possible, went out on tiptoe and ran out into
the street as though from a plague-stricken house.  For a long
while he chatted and joked with his cab-driver, trying to recover
his spirits.

At the French theater where he arrived for the last act, and
afterwards at the Tatar restaurant after his champagne, Stepan
Arkadyevitch felt a little refreshed in the atmosphere he was
used to.  But still he felt quite unlike himself all that
evening.

On getting home to Pyotr Oblonsky's, where he was staying, Stepan
Arkadyevitch found a note from Betsy.  She wrote to him that she
was very anxious to finish their interrupted conversation, and
begged him to come next day.  He had scarcely read this note, and
frowned at its contents, when he heard below the ponderous tramp
of the servants, carrying something heavy.

Stepan Arkadyevitch went out to look.  It was the rejuvenated
Pyotr Oblonsky.  He was so drunk that he could not walk upstairs;
but he told them to set him on his legs when he saw Stepan
Arkadyevitch, and clinging to him, walked with him into his room
and there began telling him how he had spent the evening, and
fell asleep doing so.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was in very low spirits, which happened
rarely with him, and for a long while he could not go to sleep.
Everything he could recall to his mind, everything was
disgusting; but most disgusting of all, as if it were something
shameful, was the memory of the evening he had spent at Countess
Lidia Ivanovna's.

Next day he received from Alexey Alexandrovitch a final answer,
refusing to grant Anna's divorce, and he understood that this
decision was based on what the Frenchman had said in his real or
pretended trance.



Chapter 23


In order to carry through any undertaking in family life, there
must necessarily be either complete division between the husband
and wife, or loving agreement.  When the relations of a couple
are vacillating and neither one thing nor the other, no sort of
enterprise can be undertaken.

Many families remain for years in the same place, though both
husband and wife are sick of it, simply because there is neither
complete division nor agreement between them.

Both Vronsky and Anna felt life in Moscow insupportable in the
heat and dust, when the spring sunshine was followed by the glare
of summer, and all the trees in the boulevards had long since
been in full leaf, and the leaves were covered with dust.  But
they did not go back to Vozdvizhenskoe, as they had arranged to
do long before; they went on staying in Moscow, though they both
loathed it, because of late there had been no agreement between
them.

The irritability that kept them apart had no external cause, and
all efforts to come to an understanding intensified it, instead
of removing it.  It was an inner irritation, grounded in her mind
on the conviction that his love had grown less; in his, on regret
that he had put himself for her sake in a difficult position,
which she, instead of lightening, made still more difficult.
Neither of them gave full utterance to their sense of grievance,
but they considered each other in the wrong, and tried on every
pretext to prove this to one another.

In her eyes the whole of him, with all his habits, ideas,
desires, with all his spiritual and physical temperament, was one
thing--love for women, and that love, she felt, ought to be
entirely concentrated on her alone.  That love was less;
consequently, as she reasoned, he must have transferred part of
his love to other women or to another woman--and she was jealous.
She was jealous not of any particular woman but of the decrease
of his love.  Not having got an object for her jealousy, she was
on the lookout for it.  At the slightest hint she transferred her
jealousy from one object to another.  At one time she was jealous
of those low women with whom he might so easily renew his old
bachelor ties; then she was jealous of the society women he might
meet; then she was jealous of the imaginary girl whom he might
want to marry, for whose sake he would break with her.  And this
last form of jealousy tortured her most of all, especially as he
had unwarily told her, in a moment of frankness, that his mother
knew him so little that she had had the audacity to try and
persuade him to marry the young Princess Sorokina.

And being jealous of him, Anna was indignant against him and
found grounds for indignation in everything.  For everything that
was difficult in her position she blamed him.  The agonizing
condition of suspense she had passed in Moscow, the tardiness and
indecision of Alexey Alexandrovitch, her solitude--she put it all
down to him.  If he had loved her he would have seen all the
bitterness of her position, and would have rescued her from it.
For her being in Moscow and not in the country, he was to blame
too.  He could not live buried in the country as she would have
liked to do.  He must have society, and he had put her in this
awful position, the bitterness of which he would not see.  And
again, it was his fault that she was forever separated from her
son.

Even the rare moments of tenderness that came from time to time
did not soothe her; in his tenderness now she saw a shade of
complacency, of self-confidence, which had not been of old,
and which exasperated her.

It was dusk.  Anna was alone, and waiting for him to come back
from a bachelor dinner.  She walked up and down in his study (the
room where the noise from the street was least heard), and
thought over every detail of their yesterday's quarrel.  Going
back from the well-remembered, offensive words of the quarrel to
what had been the ground of it, she arrived at last at its
origin.  For a long while she could hardly believe that their
dissension had arisen from a conversation so inoffensive, of so
little moment to either.  But so it actually had been.  It all
arose from his laughing at the girls' high schools, declaring
they were useless, while she defended them.  He had spoken
slightingly of women's education in general, and had said that
Hannah, Anna's English protegée, had not the slightest need to
know anything of physics.

This irritated Anna.  She saw in this a contemptuous reference to
her occupations.  And she bethought her of a phrase to pay him
back for the pain he had given her.  "I don't expect you to
understand me, my feelings, as anyone who loved me might, but
