John xxi. 7). It is also nearly akin to the fragment at the end of the
_Gospel of Peter_. It symbolizes the work of the apostolic mission under
the figure of the fishing of men (_cf._ Mark i. 17; Matt. xiii. 47-50),
and gives to Peter the leading part. In fact Peter not only comes to the
Lord in advance of all the rest, and alone maintains with him something
like the intimate relations of the past, but performs after his private
interview with Jesus the gigantic feat of bringing unaided to land the
entire miraculous catch. The great and various multitude, which all
working in common had enclosed in the net, but had not been able to lift
into the boat, Peter, at Jesus' word, brought safely home. The writer
who so employs the already conventionalized symbols of ecclesiastical
imagery, surely had no mean idea of the apostleship of Peter. In at
least as high degree as the author of Acts he conceives of Peter as
commissioned in a special sense to be the great director and leader of
all missionary activity, to Gentiles as well as Jews (Acts xv. 7), and
to have been the saviour of the unity of the church in the hour of its
threatened disruption. When in addition he is invested by Jesus with the
insignia and office of chief under-shepherd of the flock of God, the
stain of his threefold denial wiped out by a threefold opportunity to
prove his special love by special service, and the ignominy of his
previous failure to "follow" (xiii. 36-38) atoned for by the promise
that in old age he shall have opportunity to follow Jesus in martyrdom
(xxi. 18 f.), there remains nothing that the most exacting friend of
'catholic' apostolicity could demand in the way of tribute to its great
representative.

    Footnote 33: The addition in ver. 10_a_ and the plural "they" in
    ver. 11, are mere editorial adaptations of the story to Mark i.
    16-20.

And yet the main object of the Epilogue has not yet been touched. It was
not written, we may be sure, merely to glorify Peter; though it is, of
course, insupposable that the Gospel in its primitive form simply left
Peter in the attitude of a renegade after xviii. 27, to reappear quite
as if nothing had happened in xx. 1 ff.[34] It pays its tribute to
Peter as chief witness to the resurrection, chief apostle, chief saviour
of the unity of the church, chief under-shepherd of the flock of God, in
the interest of that catholic apostolic unity which all churchmen were
so earnestly labouring to achieve in the writer's time, and for which
the name of Peter was increasingly significant. But the chief object of
the Epilogue is something else. It was written primarily to commend and
find room for another authority, the authority of the Gospel to which
it is appended, and which repeatedly sets over against Peter a
mysterious unnamed figure, who always sees when Peter is blind, believes
when Peter is unbelieving, is faithful when Peter and all the rest have
fled in cowardly desertion. The object of the Epilogue is to find room
alongside the growing and salutary authority of Peter for the authority
and message of "the disciple whom Jesus loved." Its purpose appears in
its conclusion, "This (the disciple whom Jesus loved) is the disciple
which beareth witness of these things, and wrote these things, and we
(the church which cherishes and gives forth this 'spiritual' Gospel)
know that his witness is true."

    Footnote 34: We must conclude that _both_ these data from Synoptic
    tradition, the denial (xiii. 36-38; xviii. 15-18, 25-27) _and_ the
    restoration (ch. xxi.) are supplements to the original form of the
    Gospel.

The writer does not explicitly say that he means the Apostle John
(reputed in Ephesus the author of Revelation); for such direct
identification might well endanger his own object. But he makes it clear
in two ways that John is really intended, as, indeed, subsequent writers
immediately infer.[35] (1) "The sons of Zebedee" are introduced for the
first time in the entire work in xxi. 2, among the group who are present
with Peter. An easy process of elimination,[36] then, leaves open to
identification as "the disciple whom Jesus loved" (ver. 7) only John, or
else one of the two unnamed "other disciples," who could hardly be
reckoned among Jesus' closest intimates.

    Footnote 35: The _Muratorianum_ bases its legendary account of the
    writing of the Fourth gospel by "John" with the endorsement of "his
    fellow-disciples and bishops" on John xxi. 24.

    Footnote 36: The early death of James the son of Zebedee (Acts xii.
    1) excludes him from consideration.

(2) The scene of the prediction of Peter's martyrdom (xxi. 18 f.) is
followed immediately (ver. 20-23) by a reference to traditions which we
know to have been current before the close of the first century
regarding the martyrdom of the two sons of Zebedee, in particular
regarding John. Peter in xxi. 21 raises the question as to the _fate_ of
"the disciple whom Jesus loved" (literally, "and as to this man,
what?"). The pregnant command of Jesus to Peter, "Follow me," is clearly
intended to have reference to martyrdom (_cf._ xiii. 36 f.), and it is
obeyed by "the disciple whom Jesus loved" as well as Peter. Peter's
inquiry and the Lord's reply had given rise "among the brethren" to the
belief that this disciple would "tarry" till the Coming. Now it is of
John, son of Zebedee, and only of him, that we have a curious
vacillation of ancient tradition between belief in his martyrdom in the
same sense as his brother James (Mark x. 39), and a belief (probably
based on Mark ix. 1) that he would tarry as an abiding witness until the
Coming ('white martyrdom'). The writer of the Epilogue has manifestly
these traditions about the fate of John in mind. He would have his
readers understand that the enigmatic prophecy of Jesus neither
promised the permanent survival of John, nor his violent death, but was
at least capable of an interpretation which set John alongside of Peter,
not as a rival of his leadership, or directive control, but simply as a
witness ('martyr') to the truth. Peter is willingly granted the office
of 'ruling elder' in the church, if only "the disciple whom Jesus loved"
may have the function of the prophet and teacher 'in the Spirit,' the
man of faith and insight, whose function it is to interpret 'the mind of
Christ.'

Few things could be more significant of the conditions of Christian life
and thought in the earlier years of the second century than this
Epilogue, appended to the 'spiritual' Gospel to commend it to general
acceptance in the church. It is not vitally important whether the
cautiously suggested identification of the Beloved Disciple with John,
the son of Zebedee, be correct or not. It is important to a historical
appreciation of the great literary contribution of the churches of Paul
to the 'catholic' Christianity of the second century, that we realize
what Petrine catholicity had then come to mean, and how the Pauline
spiritual gospel came half-way to meet it. On this point a study of the
epilogues is rewarding, but especially of the great Epilogue to the
Gospel of John.

We have reached the period for our own concluding words. The process of
combination and canonization of the New Testament writings, which
followed upon the consolidation of the churches in the second century
falls outside our province. We have sought only to give some insight
into the origins, considering the Making of the New Testament to apply
rather to the creations of the formative period, when conscious
inspiration was still in its full glow, than to the period of collection
into an official canon. As we look back over the two leading types of
Christian thought, Pauline and 'Apostolic,' the Greek-Christian gospel
_about_ Jesus, and the Jewish-Christian gospel _of_ Jesus, the gospel of
the Spirit and the gospel of authority, we cannot fail to realize how
deep and broad and ancient are the two great currents of religious
thought and life that here are mingling, contending, coming to new
expression and clearer definition. Each has its various subdivisions and
modifications, Pauline Christianity in the Greek world has its problems
of resistance to Hellenistic perversion on the one side, to reaction
toward Jewish external authority on the other. Apostolic Christianity
whether in its more conservative form at Jerusalem, or in broader
assimilation to Pauline doctrine at Antioch and Rome, has also its
divergent streams, its more primitive and its more developed stages. The
literature, as we slowly come to appreciate it against the background of
the times, more and more reveals itself as an index to the life. Not to
the mere idiosyncrasies of individuals, but to the great Gulf-stream of
the human instinct for social Righteousness and for individual
Redemption, as it sweeps onward in its mighty tide.

The literature of the New Testament must be understood historically if
understood at all. It must be understood as the product, we might almost
say the precipitate, of the greatest period in the history of religion.
It represents the meeting and mutual adjustment of two fundamental and
complementary conceptions of religion. The antithesis is not merely that
between the particularism of the Jew and the universalism of the
Gentile. It is an antithesis of the social ideal of Law and Prophets
against the individual ideal of personal redemption through union with
the divine Spirit, which lay at the heart of all vital Hellenistic
religious thought in this period of the Empire. Christianity as we know
it, the religion of humanity as it has come to be, the ultimate
world-religion as we believe it destined to become, is a resultant of
these two factors, Semitic and Aryan, the social and the individual
ideal. Its canonized literature represents the combination. On the one
side the social ideal is predominant. It perpetuates the gospel _of_
Jesus in the form of Matthæan and Petrine tradition, supplemented by
apocalypse, which tradition attaches conjecturally to the name of John.
The goal it seeks is the Kingdom of God, righteousness and peace on
earth as in heaven. On the other side the individual ideal predominates.
It perpetuates the gospel _about_ Jesus in the form of the Pauline and
Johannine doctrine of his person, regarded as the norm and type of
spiritual life. The goal it seeks is personal immortality by moral
fellowship with God. Its faith is Son ship, by participation in the
divine nature, without limitation in time, without loss of individual
identity. Both types of gospel are justified in claiming to emanate from
Jesus of Nazareth; but neither without the other can claim to fully
represent the significance of his spirit and life.

The unity of the New Testament is a unity in diversity. Just because it
presents so widely divergent conceptions of what the gospel is, it gives
promise of perennial fecundity. Studied not after the manner of the
scribes, who think that in their book of precept and prophecy they have
a passport to rewards in a magical world to come, but studied as a
"manifestation of the life, even the eternal life" of the Spirit of God
in man, it will continue to reproduce the spirit and mind of Christ.
Studied as a reflection at various times and in divers manners of that
redemptive Wisdom of God, which "in every generation entering into holy
souls makes men to be prophets and friends of God" (Sap. vii. 27), and
which the Greeks, considering it, unfortunately, in its intellectual
rather than its moral aspect, call the Logos of God, it will prove, as
in so many generations past it has proved, an "incorruptible seed," a
"word of good tidings preached unto" the world, a "word of the Lord that
abideth for ever."




BIBLIOGRAPHY


1. General Introductions to N.T. Literature.

    MOFFATT, JAS. _"Internat. Theol. Library" Series._ Scribner's, 1911.
    Standard, comprehensive, progressive. Best compendium of the subject
    in English. A book for experts. 671 pp., 8vo.

    JÜLICHER, A. Engl. transl, by D. A. Ward, from 4th German ed.
    London, Smith, Elder & Co., 1903. The most serviceable of modern
    German Introductions, based on the standard work of the "liberal"
    school, by H. J. Holtzmann. 650 pp., large 8vo.

    ZAHN, THEO. Engl. transl. from 3rd German ed., by M. W. Jacobus.
    Scribner's, 1909. Standard "conservative" work. Immense scholarship
    in the harness of apologetics. Total, 1750 pp., in 3 vols., large
    8vo.

    BACON, B. W. _"New Test. Handbook" Series._ Macmillan 1900. Similar
    to Moffatt's in standpoint, but without the survey of the
    literature. For readers less technically advanced. 300 pp., small
    8vo.

    PEAKE, A. S. N.Y., Scribner's, 1910. 250 pp., 12mo. An excellent
    primer of the subject, generally conservative.


2. Critical Treatments of Pauline Literature.

    SHAW, R. D. _The Pauline Epistles, Introductory and Expository
    Studies_, 2nd ed. T. & T. Clarke, 1904. 518 pp., large 8vo. Sober
    and cautious. For general readers.

    RAMSAY, W. M. _Pauline and other Studies in Early Christian
    History._ Hodder & Stoughton, 1906. 425 pp., large 8vo. _The Cities
    of St. Paul_ (1907, 468 pp.) is by the same author, an eminent
    geographer and archaeologist ardently enlisted against German
    criticism. Interesting but diffuse.

    PFLEIDERER, O. _Paulinism._ Engl. transl. by E. Peters. 2nd ed.
    1891. Williams & Norgate. 2 vols. 8vo. Total, 580 pp., 8vo. Still a
    standard exposition of Paul's system of thought. A book for experts.

    BAUR, F. C. _Paul the Apostle of Jesus Christ, his Life and Work,
    Epistles and Doctrine._ Engl. transl. of Zeller's (2nd), German ed.,
    by A. Menzies. Williams & Norgate, 1876. Two vols. 8vo (375 + 350
    pp.). An epoch-making book, the starting-point of modern criticism.

    SCHWEITZER, A. This able, though one-sided, critic has issued
    already (1912) the conclusion to his study of modern Lives of Christ
    (see below, _The Quest of the Historical Jesus_) under the title
    _Geschichte der Paulinischen Forschung_. It may be expected that
    this comprehensive survey and searching criticism of the literature
    of Pauline study will soon be made accessible to the English reader.

    WREDE, W. _Paul._ Engl. transl. by E. Lummis. P. Green, London,
    1907. 190 pp., 12mo. A brief, brilliant, popular sketch, radical,
    suggestive. Needs the balance of more cautious criticism.

    WEISS, J. _Paul and Jesus._ Engl. transl. by H. J. Chaytor. London
    and New York, Harper & Bros., 1909. 130 pp., 12mo. An effective
    answer to Wrede's view of Paul as the real creator of Christianity,
    by a progressive and able critic.

    Lives of Paul by Cone, Clemen (German) and others are abundant in
    recent years. See the _Encyclopaedias_ and _Dictionaries of the
    Bible_, s.v. "Paul."


3. Critical Treatments of the Synoptic Gospels and Acts.

    STANTON, V. H. _The Gospels as Historical Documents_, Parts I and
    II. Cambridge University Press, 1903-1909. 297 + 400 pp., 8vo. A
    standard survey of Gospel criticism from a conservative standpoint,
    the work of a scholar for scholars.

    CONE, O. _Gospel Criticism and Historical Christianity._ Putnam's,
    N.Y., 1891. 375 pp., small 8vo. Liberal, semi-popular.

    BURKITT, F. C. _The Earliest Sources for the Life of Jesus._
    Houghton & Mifflin, Boston and New York, 1910. 130 pp., 12mo. Simple
    and popular. Burkitt is a leading progressive scholar.


4. The Johannine Writings.

    DRUMMOND, JAS. _Character and Authorship of the Fourth Gospel._
    Scribner's, N.Y., 1904. 544 pp., 8vo. The ablest recent defence of
    the traditional authorship. Scholarly discussion of the literary
    history.

    BACON, B. W. _The Fourth Gospel in Research and Debate._ Moffat,
    Yard & Co., N.Y., 1910. 556 pp., 8vo. A similar discussion of the
    evidences reaching the reverse conclusion.

    SCOTT, E. F. _The Fourth Gospel, its Purpose and Theology._ T. & T.
    Clarke, Edinburgh, 1906. 386 pp., 8vo. Admirable in temper, lucid in
    style, semi-popular.

    SCHMIEDEL, P. W. _The Johannine Writings._ Engl. transl., by M. A.
    Canney. London, A. & C. Black, 1903. 295 pp., 12mo. Brief, popular,
    radical, by one of the ablest of N.T. critics.


General.

    REUSS, E. _History of the N.T._ Engl. transl. from 5th German ed.,
    by E. L. Houghton. Boston, Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1884. 649 pp. 2
    vols. large 8vo. A standard treasury of scholarly information.

    WERNLE, P. _The Beginnings of Christianity._ Engl. transl., by G. A.
    Bienemann. London, Williams & Norgate, 1904. 388 + 404 pp., 8vo. 2
    vols. Able, scholarly, advanced.

    PFLEIDERER, O. _Christian Origins._ Engl. transl., by D. Huebsch.
    New York, B. W. Huebsch, 1906. 295 pp., 12mo. Popular lectures
    showing something of the views of the modern school of critics known
    as _religionsgeschichtlich_. Pfleiderer's critical opinions are
    fully expressed in his _Primitive Christianity_ (Engl. transl., by
    W. Montgomery, in four vols., 8vo. Putnams, 1909).

    MUZZEY, D. S. _The Rise of the N.T._ New York, Macmillan, 1900. 156
    pp., 12mo. An excellent primer for beginners.

    WREDE, W. _The Origin of the N.T._ Engl. transl. by J. S. Hill.
    Harper & Bros., London & New York, 1909. 151 pp., 12mo. An admirable
    primer by a brilliant leader of advanced criticism.

    VON SODEN. _The History of Early Christian Literature. Writings of
    the N.T._ Engl. transl., by J. R. Wilkinson. Williams & Norgate,
    1906. 476 pp., 12mo. A book for beginners by a great N.T. scholar of
    liberal views. A closely connected field is covered by various
    _Histories of the Apostolic Age_, of which the most recent and
    important are those of Weizsäcker (Engl. transl., 1895) and
    McGiffert (1897). Less technical and more orthodox are those of
    Vernon-Bartlett (1899) and J. H. Ropes (1906). _Critical Lives of
    Christ_ present the results of critical study of the Gospels. A
    survey of this field of research, keenly analytical and severely
    critical, is given by A. Schweitzer in _The Quest of the Historical
    Jesus_ (Engl. transl. by W. Montgomery. A. & C. Black, 1910. 416
    pp., 8vo). Schweitzer writes with great scholarship and power, but
    decided polemic interest as a "consistent eschatologist."




INDEX


  Abomination, 161, 218

  Acts, 57 ff., 64 ff., 174 ff.

  Agabus, 185, 202

  Allegory (in John), 224

  Angelology and demonology, 95

  Antichrist, 217 f.

  Anti-legalism (of Mark), 166

  Antinomian heresy, 149, 214

  Antioch, 71, 175 ff., 183 f.

  Apocalypses, 29, 51, 87, 188, 197

  Apostolic Christianity, 42, 126, 129, 246

  Apostolic Commission, 238 f.

  Apostolic Council, 60, 63, 67

  Apotheosis doctrine, 49

  Appendix to John, 107, 147, 211, 236 ff.

  Asia, Churches of, 197 ff.

  Athanasius, 29 f.


  Babylon (= Rome), 115, 196

  Baptist (in John), 225

  Bar Cocheba, 204

  _Baruch, Apocalypse of_ 188

  Baur, F. C., 37 ff.

  Beloved disciple, the, 227, 243 ff.


  Cæsarea, 85

  Calvin, 37

  Canonization of the Law, 12

  Cerinthus, 219

  Chiliasts, 187

  Christological Epistles, 97

  Christ-party, 45

  Clement of Rome, 19 f., 79, 115, 119

  Clement of Alexandria, 25

  _Clementine Homilies and Recognitions_, 148

  Colossians, 98

  Corinthian Epistles, 76 ff.


  Decrees of Jerusalem, 60

  Diary of Acts, 183

  Dionysius of Alexandria, 191

  Disputed books, 30

  Doketism, 21, 110, 126, 153, 163, 184, 186, 214, 217, 219


  Elder (of 2nd and 3rd John), 215

  Elements, 76, 99

  Ephesians, 98

  Ephesus, 76, 97, 111 f., 191, 201, 211

  Epiphanius, 131

  Epistles (Major), 43

  Epistles of the Captivity, 42, 85, 100

  Eschatological discourse, 161

  Esdras (Apocalypse of), 188

  External evidence, 38


  False brethren, 41

  Feasts (in John), 226

  Fornication, 60, 77


  Gaius (3rd John), 215 f.

  Gaius of Rome, 31, 237

  Galatians, 56, 74

  Gentile liberty, 61 ff.

  Gnosticism, 40, 108, 207 f.

  _Gospel according to the Hebrews_, 135, 145

  _Gospel of the Nazarenes_, 132, 145 ff., 236


  Harnack, 98

  Hebrews, 107, 116 ff.

  Hebrews, Apostolic authority in, 18

  Hebrews, Canonical standing of, 31

  Hegesippus, 105 f., 111

  Hellenistic religion, 247

  Hermas, 21, 28, 119 f., 237


  Ignatius, 20 f., 23, 111, 124, 126, 208

  Incarnation Doctrine, 49, 154, 229, 231

  Infancy of Jesus (in Matthew and Luke), 152

  Internal evidence, 38

  Irenæus, 81, 133, 219


  James, 104 ff., 107, 112 f., 130

  Jerusalem Conference, 67, 71

  Jerusalem succession, 105 f., 119

  John, the Apostle, a martyr, 104, 194, 243

  John, Gospel of, 25, 31, 43, 54, 206 ff.

  John, Revelation of, 30, 43, 63, 107, 131, 187, 189 ff., 235

  John, Epistles of, 43, 111, 126, 211 ff.

  John, _Acts of_, 219 f.

  John, the Elder, 26, 131, 133, 236

  Josephus (used by Luke), 174

  Judaism _v._ Hellenism, 52 f.

  Judaizers, 68

  Jude, 19, 80, 107, 130

  Justin Martyr, 187, 190, 235 f.


  Kindred of the Lord, 164 f.


  Laodiceans, 98

  Law _v._ grace, 8, 14, 66, 74, 81, 123

  _Logia_, 136, 141

  Logos-doctrine, 55, 221, 232

  Lordship (of Christ), 96

  Luke, 27, 139, 173 f.

  Luke, his omissions from Mark, 178 f.

  Luke, his purpose in writing, 180 f.

  Luther, 37


  Magic, 93 ff.

  Marcion, 22 ff., 40

  Mark, 129, 134, 159 ff.

  Mark, Duplication in, 172

  Mark, Endings of, 168 ff., 235 f.

  Matthew, 131 ff., 187

  Melito of Sardis, 19, 190

  Michælis, 35

  Missionary Journey, First, 58 f.

  Missionary Journey, Second, 72

  Moffatt, Jas., 151

  Montanus, 28 f.

  Muratorian Fragment, 30, 234


  Nepos, the Chiliast, 191


  Offering for the poor, 69


  Palestine, Origin of Revelations, 195 ff.

  Papias, 26, 105 f., 130 f., 186 f., 190, 208

  Parables (in Matthew), 149 f.

  Passover, 101, 173

  Pastoral Epistles, 19, 31, 83, 108, 111, 123

  Patmos, 191, 200 f.

  Paul, Original Apostle of Asia, 205

  Paul, his religious experience, 16

  Paul, martyrdom, 105

  Pauline _v._ Petrine gospel, 49

  Paulinism of Mark, 162

  Persecution, 13, 122

  Peter (the Apostle), 24, 26, 106, 133, 146

  Peter, _Apocalypse of_, 29 f.

  Peter, Commission of, 240 f.

  Peter, Epistles of, 41, 108 f., 112 ff.

  Peter, _Gospel of_, 171, 221, 236

  Peter, _Preaching of_, 139

  Pharisaic Judaism, 121

  Philemon, 88

  Philip, Daughters of, 185 f.

  Philippians, 89 ff.

  Phrygian heresy, 28

  _Pirke Aboth_, 141

  Polycarp, 26, 110, 130, 186, 218

  Porphyry, 106

  Post-Reformation dogma, 33 f.

  Precepts (of Jesus), 137

  Prologue (of John), 231

  Prophecy, 188 f., 209


  Q-material, 141 ff.


  Reconciliation with God, 103

  Redeemer-gods, 50

  Redemption doctrines, 86, 93

  Reformation, 37

  Repentance (the Great), 156 f.

  Resurrection-doctrine, 73, 78, 125, 155, 158, 204, 210

  Revelation (_See_ John, Revelation of)

  Romans, 75, 80 ff.

  Rome, 120, 129


  Satan, Dominion of, 157

  Scripture, Use in Paul, 17

  Scripture, Use in John, 25

  Second Coming, 230

  Sermon on Mount, 9

  Signs in Fourth gospel, 223

  Simon, Richard, 35

  Spirit, Doctrine of the, 17, 67, 101 156, 220

  Subscriptions, 233

  Superstitious Judaism, 93 f.

  Symeon, son of Clopas, 105

  Synoptic writings, 44, 107

  Synoptic writings in John, 228

  Syria and Cilicia, 61, 129


  _Teaching of the Twelve_, 28, 63, 185

  Tertullian, 19, 29

  Thessalonian Epistles, 73

  Timothy (_See_ Pastoral Epistles), 78

  Titus (_See_ Pastoral Epistles)

  Transfiguration, 165, 167, 228, 230

  Tübingen School, 43 ff.


  Unity of the Church, 70, 103, 120

  Unity of the N.T., 248


  Way (= sect), 8

  Weak (party of the), 45

  Wisdom of God, 99, 209, 229

  Wisdom of Solomon (Sap.), 51

  Words of Jesus, 19, 129 f., 144 f.


  Zahn, 115




_Richard Clay & Sons, Limited, London and Bungay._






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Making of the New Testament, by 
Benjamin W. Bacon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAKING OF THE NEW TESTAMENT ***

***** This file should be named 39288-8.txt or 39288-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/8/39288/

Produced by David Edwards, Hazel Batey and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook, Rome, Turkey, and Jerusalem, by Edward Hoare


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Rome, Turkey, and Jerusalem


Author: Edward Hoare



Release Date: March 28, 2012  [eBook #39290]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROME, TURKEY, AND JERUSALEM***


Transcribed from the 1876 H. Colbran edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                              ROME, TURKEY,
                                   AND
                                JERUSALEM.


                                * * * * *

                          BY THE REV. E. HOARE,
                    VICAR OF TRINITY, TUNBRIDGE WELLS,
                    AND HONORARY CANON OF CANTERBURY.

                                * * * * *

                            _SECOND EDITION_.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                          HATCHARDS, PICCADILLY.
               H. COLBRAN, CALVERLEY ROAD, TUNBRIDGE WELLS.
                                  1876.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                       Printed by JOHN STRANGEWAYS,
                         Castle St. Leicester Sq.




CONTENTS.

ROME:—                        PAGE
   THE OUTLINE                   1
   THE CONSUMPTION              18
TURKEY:—
   THE EUPHRATES                36
   THE FROGS                    54
   THE ADVENT                   69
JERUSALEM                       87




ROME.


I.
THE OUTLINE.


It is impossible to imagine anything more delightful than the prospect of
the promised return of our most blessed Saviour.  How do the father and
the mother feel when they welcome their long-absent son from India?  How
will many an English wife feel when she welcomes her husband from the
Arctic Expedition?  And how must the Church of God feel when, after her
long night of toil and difficulty, she stands face to face before Him
whom her soul loveth, and enters into the full enjoyment of the promise,
‘So shall we ever be with the Lord?’  There will be no tears then, for
there will be no sorrow; no death then, for there will be no more curse;
no sin then, for we shall see Him as He is, and shall be like Him.  Then
will be the time of resurrection, when all the firstborn of God shall
awake to a life without decay and without corruption; and then the time
of reunion, when the whole company of God’s elect shall stand together
before the Lord, never again to shed a tear over each other’s grave; and
then will be the time when those who have loved and longed after Him, as
they have journeyed on alone in their pilgrimage, will find themselves on
the right hand of His throne, and hear His delightful words, ‘Come, ye
blessed children of my Father: inherit the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world!’

No wonder then that the people of God are waiting with anxious hearts for
the Advent; and no wonder that many are ready to say, ‘Lord, how long?’
and to ask, What hope is there of His quick return?  Have we, or have we
not, any reason to look out for it soon?  To this inquiry I would
endeavour to draw your attention this morning; and in doing so, I do not
intend to examine into what are usually called ‘the signs of the times,’
but to study the great prophetic sketch of the world’s history as given
to us by the prophet Daniel.  This may be termed the backbone of
prophecy, and almost all the great prophecies of Holy Scripture fit into
it at some point or other; so that, if we wish to understand them, we
must begin by studying it.  I fear I may not interest those who aim
simply to have their hearts warmed by the ministry.  But they must
remember that the real study of God’s Word requires work, and that work,
though it lays the best possible foundation for feeling, does not at the
time excite it.  To-day, then, we are to work, and I hope the Lord may so
bless His Word, that through work we may be led to feel.

Our business, then, is to endeavour to discover whether the great
prophetic sketch of history, given through the prophet Daniel, encourages
the blessed hope that the coming of the Lord may be near.  Daniel gives a
prophecy of the history of political power from his own day till the time
when ‘the Ancient of Days shall sit,’ and describes a succession of
events which must take place in the interval.  It is clear that our
business is to ascertain how many of these events have taken place, or,
in other words, how far we have advanced in the series.

In the study of our subject we have the advantage of looking at two sides
of the picture, for it has pleased God to give us the same series as seen
in two different aspects.  In the second and seventh chapters you will
find predictions of the same events under different figures.  In the
second chapter the prophecy is given as a vision to a proud, idolatrous
monarch.  So the different kingdoms about to arise appear to him as the
several parts of a mighty image, with himself as the head of gold.  It
was given in just such a shape as should coincide with his idolatry and
his pride.  Whereas, in the seventh chapter, the vision is given to one
of God’s people, and he sees in all this glory nothing better than a
series of wild beasts coming up one after another to devour.  How
different is the estimate of the world from that of God!  The world
regards Babylon as the head of gold, the summit of glory and greatness,
while God looks on it as a savage beast, to be dreaded by His saints!
The same difference of character may be observed in the visions of the
coming of the Lord.  To the great king it appeared as a triumphant
kingdom, to the captive prophet as a manifestation of the Son of man.
The one saw a kingdom, the other a person; the one, the overthrow of
power, the other, the advent of the Lord of Glory.

But now let us look at the series.  In both prophecies there is a
description of four kingdoms which should in succession be supreme in
political power, and which should fill up an interval between Daniel and
the Advent.

1.  There is the head of gold in Nebuchadnezzar’s image, the same as the
lion in the vision of Daniel.  The most precious of metals corresponding
to the king of beasts.

2.  There is next the breast and arms of silver, corresponding to the
bear of Daniel.

3.  After that the belly and thighs of brass, representing the same
nation as the leopard of the prophet.

4.  And following them is the last kingdom of the four, represented to
Nebuchadnezzar as the ‘legs of iron, and the feet, part of iron and part
of clay,’ and to Daniel as a beast, ‘dreadful and terrible, and strong
exceedingly.’

It is interesting to observe how the same iron character is attributed to
this last power in both visions.  In the one we read of it, chap. ii. 40,
‘The fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron breaketh
in pieces and subdueth all things; and as iron that breaketh all things,
shall it break in pieces and bruise.’  And in the other, chap. vii. 7, it
is said to be, ‘strong exceedingly, and it had great iron teeth: it
devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of
it.’

Such is the series of kingdoms that were to hold the chief political
power of the world, and fill up the whole interval between the date of
the prophecy and the advent of the Lord.  Now the remarkable, and I
believe I may say the indisputable, fact, is that, according to the
prophecy, all these four kingdoms have arisen.  They have followed each
other exactly as it was predicted.  Babylon was the head of gold, or the
lion.  The Medes and Persians were the breast of silver, or the bear.
Greece, always called ‘the brazen armed,’ in classic poetry, was the
belly and the thighs of brass, or the leopard.  And then the mighty power
of Rome, far exceeding all the others in its terrible strength, with the
legs of iron in the royal image, and the teeth of iron in the prophetic
beast.  Thus far there is an agreement almost unanimous among the
students of prophetic Scripture; and the conclusion certainly is, that we
have already been a long time under the last of the four successive
empires of the world.  So far then as those four empires are concerned,
we are encouraged to entertain the strong hope that, as we have reached
the last kingdom in the succession, we may begin hopefully to look out
for the end.  We have passed the last station on the line, so now we may
begin to prepare for home.

But again.  There is one remarkable difference between the fourth kingdom
and the other three, viz. this, that its history is divided into two
periods, during the first of which it appears as an undivided power, and
during the second split up into ten.  In chap. ii. 41, it says, ‘the
kingdom shall be divided.’  In this divided period it is represented by
the ten toes on the image, and the ten horns on the beast.  The ten toes
are described as kings, or kingdoms, in chap. ii. 44; and so are the ten
horns in chap. vii. 24, where it is said, ‘The ten horns out of this
kingdom are ten kings that shall arise.’  So then the prophecy teaches us
that when Rome had overpowered Greece it would go on for a time as one
mighty undivided empire, but that after a time it would break up into a
cluster of kingdoms, and that this cluster would retain amongst them the
supremacy of the world.  It does not describe any fresh shift of
political supremacy to any new kingdom that should arise, or the loss or
decay of that supremacy.  But it teaches that there would be a division
in the kingdom, that the parts should fall asunder, and that, while the
iron of the fourth kingdom would remain amongst them, there should be so
much clay mixed up with it, that it should never again be united under a
single head.

Now this is exactly what has happened.  In the days of the Cæsars united
Rome was supreme in the pomp of the iron empire.  Its body was Europe,
and its heart was the emperor.  It was one as much as Babylon had been
one under Nebuchadnezzar.  But look at it now.  There is all the old
power; for Europe and its races practically govern the world.  It has not
lost its iron.  But there is no one kingdom that embodies all.  The power
is vested in a cluster of independent nations.  Many attempts have been
made to combine them: some by conquest, as in the case of Napoleon; some
by negotiation, as in the case of the Spanish marriages.  But all in
vain, for the toes are irrecoverably divided, and whatever is done,
though as an aggregate they retain their power, as individual nations
they are always distinct.  I have no time to enter into detail, but I
regard this division as a most remarkable fulfilment of the prophetic
word.  More than five hundred years before the coming of the Lord there
was a captive in Babylon, and God so directed that man’s mind, as through
him to communicate to the world even then the present position of modern
Europe.  With such a fact before us who can doubt the inspiration of the
prophet, or the statement of St. Peter, that ‘holy men of God spake as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost?’

But, without stopping to consider the wonders of the prophecy, let us
learn the lesson which it teaches us with reference to the nearness of
the Advent.  We have already found that we have long since reached the
fourth kingdom of the series; and now we are led a step further, and find
that we have long since reached the second period of that kingdom.  It is
difficult with accuracy to assign a date, for the transition was gradual;
but we shall be sufficiently near if we say that it practically took
place between twelve and fourteen hundred years ago.  And when we reflect
on such a promise as that in Daniel, ii. 44, in which God assures us of a
kingdom that shall be set up in the days of these kings, and never be
destroyed: when we consider that those kings have already been reigning
through that lengthened period, it is surely time that we begin to look
out for that which is to come; for the happy and blessed day when we
