not for such as he.

Perhaps the sisterly love and friendship of the three girls had more or
less exaggerated Aglaya's chances of happiness. In their opinion, the
latter's destiny was not merely to be very happy; she was to live in
a heaven on earth. Aglaya's husband was to be a compendium of all the
virtues, and of all success, not to speak of fabulous wealth. The two
elder sisters had agreed that all was to be sacrificed by them, if need
be, for Aglaya's sake; her dowry was to be colossal and unprecedented.

The general and his wife were aware of this agreement, and, therefore,
when Totski suggested himself for one of the sisters, the parents made
no doubt that one of the two elder girls would probably accept the
offer, since Totski would certainly make no difficulty as to dowry. The
general valued the proposal very highly. He knew life, and realized what
such an offer was worth.

The answer of the sisters to the communication was, if not conclusive,
at least consoling and hopeful. It made known that the eldest,
Alexandra, would very likely be disposed to listen to a proposal.

Alexandra was a good-natured girl, though she had a will of her own. She
was intelligent and kind-hearted, and, if she were to marry Totski, she
would make him a good wife. She did not care for a brilliant marriage;
she was eminently a woman calculated to soothe and sweeten the life of
any man; decidedly pretty, if not absolutely handsome. What better could
Totski wish?

So the matter crept slowly forward. The general and Totski had agreed to
avoid any hasty and irrevocable step. Alexandra's parents had not even
begun to talk to their daughters freely upon the subject, when suddenly,
as it were, a dissonant chord was struck amid the harmony of the
proceedings. Mrs. Epanchin began to show signs of discontent, and
that was a serious matter. A certain circumstance had crept in, a
disagreeable and troublesome factor, which threatened to overturn the
whole business.

This circumstance had come into existence eighteen years before. Close
to an estate of Totski's, in one of the central provinces of Russia,
there lived, at that time, a poor gentleman whose estate was of the
wretchedest description. This gentleman was noted in the district for
his persistent ill-fortune; his name was Barashkoff, and, as regards
family and descent, he was vastly superior to Totski, but his estate was
mortgaged to the last acre. One day, when he had ridden over to the town
to see a creditor, the chief peasant of his village followed him shortly
after, with the news that his house had been burnt down, and that his
wife had perished with it, but his children were safe.

Even Barashkoff, inured to the storms of evil fortune as he was, could
not stand this last stroke. He went mad and died shortly after in the
town hospital. His estate was sold for the creditors; and the little
girls--two of them, of seven and eight years of age respectively,--were
adopted by Totski, who undertook their maintenance and education in the
kindness of his heart. They were brought up together with the children
of his German bailiff. Very soon, however, there was only one of
them left-Nastasia Philipovna--for the other little one died of
whooping-cough. Totski, who was living abroad at this time, very soon
forgot all about the child; but five years after, returning to Russia,
it struck him that he would like to look over his estate and see how
matters were going there, and, arrived at his bailiff's house, he was
not long in discovering that among the children of the latter there now
dwelt a most lovely little girl of twelve, sweet and intelligent, and
bright, and promising to develop beauty of most unusual quality-as to
which last Totski was an undoubted authority.

He only stayed at his country scat a few days on this occasion, but
he had time to make his arrangements. Great changes took place in
the child's education; a good governess was engaged, a Swiss lady of
experience and culture. For four years this lady resided in the house
with little Nastia, and then the education was considered complete.
The governess took her departure, and another lady came down to fetch
Nastia, by Totski's instructions. The child was now transported to
another of Totski's estates in a distant part of the country. Here
she found a delightful little house, just built, and prepared for her
reception with great care and taste; and here she took up her abode
together with the lady who had accompanied her from her old home. In
the house there were two experienced maids, musical instruments of
all sorts, a charming "young lady's library," pictures, paint-boxes,
a lap-dog, and everything to make life agreeable. Within a fortnight
Totski himself arrived, and from that time he appeared to have taken a
great fancy to this part of the world and came down each summer, staying
two and three months at a time. So passed four years peacefully and
happily, in charming surroundings.

At the end of that time, and about four months after Totski's last
visit (he had stayed but a fortnight on this occasion), a report reached
Nastasia Philipovna that he was about to be married in St. Petersburg,
to a rich, eminent, and lovely woman. The report was only partially
true, the marriage project being only in an embryo condition; but a
great change now came over Nastasia Philipovna. She suddenly displayed
unusual decision of character; and without wasting time in thought,
she left her country home and came up to St. Petersburg, straight to
Totski's house, all alone.

The latter, amazed at her conduct, began to express his displeasure;
but he very soon became aware that he must change his voice, style, and
everything else, with this young lady; the good old times were gone. An
entirely new and different woman sat before him, between whom and
the girl he had left in the country last July there seemed nothing in
common.

In the first place, this new woman understood a good deal more than was
usual for young people of her age; so much indeed, that Totski could not
help wondering where she had picked up her knowledge. Surely not from
her "young lady's library"? It even embraced legal matters, and the
"world" in general, to a considerable extent.

Her character was absolutely changed. No more of the girlish
alternations of timidity and petulance, the adorable naivete, the
reveries, the tears, the playfulness... It was an entirely new and
hitherto unknown being who now sat and laughed at him, and informed him
to his face that she had never had the faintest feeling for him of any
kind, except loathing and contempt--contempt which had followed closely
upon her sensations of surprise and bewilderment after her first
acquaintance with him.

This new woman gave him further to understand that though it was
absolutely the same to her whom he married, yet she had decided to
prevent this marriage--for no particular reason, but that she chose to
do so, and because she wished to amuse herself at his expense for that
it was "quite her turn to laugh a little now!"

Such were her words--very likely she did not give her real reason for
this eccentric conduct; but, at all events, that was all the explanation
she deigned to offer.

Meanwhile, Totski thought the matter over as well as his scattered ideas
would permit. His meditations lasted a fortnight, however, and at the
end of that time his resolution was taken. The fact was, Totski was
at that time a man of fifty years of age; his position was solid and
respectable; his place in society had long been firmly fixed upon safe
foundations; he loved himself, his personal comforts, and his position
better than all the world, as every respectable gentleman should!

At the same time his grasp of things in general soon showed Totski that
he now had to deal with a being who was outside the pale of the ordinary
rules of traditional behaviour, and who would not only threaten mischief
but would undoubtedly carry it out, and stop for no one.

There was evidently, he concluded, something at work here; some storm of
the mind, some paroxysm of romantic anger, goodness knows against whom
or what, some insatiable contempt--in a word, something altogether
absurd and impossible, but at the same time most dangerous to be met
with by any respectable person with a position in society to keep up.

For a man of Totski's wealth and standing, it would, of course, have
been the simplest possible matter to take steps which would rid him at
once from all annoyance; while it was obviously impossible for Nastasia
Philipovna to harm him in any way, either legally or by stirring up a
scandal, for, in case of the latter danger, he could so easily remove
her to a sphere of safety. However, these arguments would only hold good
in case of Nastasia acting as others might in such an emergency. She was
much more likely to overstep the bounds of reasonable conduct by some
extraordinary eccentricity.

Here the sound judgment of Totski stood him in good stead. He realized
that Nastasia Philipovna must be well aware that she could do nothing
by legal means to injure him, and that her flashing eyes betrayed some
entirely different intention.

Nastasia Philipovna was quite capable of ruining herself, and even of
perpetrating something which would send her to Siberia, for the mere
pleasure of injuring a man for whom she had developed so inhuman a sense
of loathing and contempt. He had sufficient insight to understand that
she valued nothing in the world--herself least of all--and he made no
attempt to conceal the fact that he was a coward in some respects. For
instance, if he had been told that he would be stabbed at the altar, or
publicly insulted, he would undoubtedly have been frightened; but not so
much at the idea of being murdered, or wounded, or insulted, as at the
thought that if such things were to happen he would be made to look
ridiculous in the eyes of society.

He knew well that Nastasia thoroughly understood him and where to wound
him and how, and therefore, as the marriage was still only in embryo,
Totski decided to conciliate her by giving it up. His decision was
strengthened by the fact that Nastasia Philipovna had curiously altered
of late. It would be difficult to conceive how different she was
physically, at the present time, to the girl of a few years ago. She was
pretty then... but now!... Totski laughed angrily when he thought how
short-sighted he had been. In days gone by he remembered how he had
looked at her beautiful eyes, how even then he had marvelled at their
dark mysterious depths, and at their wondering gaze which seemed to seek
an answer to some unknown riddle. Her complexion also had altered. She
was now exceedingly pale, but, curiously, this change only made her more
beautiful. Like most men of the world, Totski had rather despised such
a cheaply-bought conquest, but of late years he had begun to think
differently about it. It had struck him as long ago as last spring that
he ought to be finding a good match for Nastasia; for instance, some
respectable and reasonable young fellow serving in a government office
in another part of the country. How maliciously Nastasia laughed at the
idea of such a thing, now!

However, it appeared to Totski that he might make use of her in another
way; and he determined to establish her in St. Petersburg, surrounding
her with all the comforts and luxuries that his wealth could command. In
this way he might gain glory in certain circles.

Five years of this Petersburg life went by, and, of course, during that
time a great deal happened. Totski's position was very uncomfortable;
having "funked" once, he could not totally regain his ease. He was
afraid, he did not know why, but he was simply afraid of Nastasia
Philipovna. For the first two years or so he had suspected that she
wished to marry him herself, and that only her vanity prevented her
telling him so. He thought that she wanted him to approach her with a
humble proposal from his own side, But to his great, and not entirely
pleasurable amazement, he discovered that this was by no means the case,
and that were he to offer himself he would be refused. He could not
understand such a state of things, and was obliged to conclude that it
was pride, the pride of an injured and imaginative woman, which had
gone to such lengths that it preferred to sit and nurse its contempt and
hatred in solitude rather than mount to heights of hitherto unattainable
splendour. To make matters worse, she was quite impervious to mercenary
considerations, and could not be bribed in any way.

Finally, Totski took cunning means to try to break his chains and
be free. He tried to tempt her in various ways to lose her heart; he
invited princes, hussars, secretaries of embassies, poets, novelists,
even Socialists, to see her; but not one of them all made the faintest
impression upon Nastasia. It was as though she had a pebble in place
of a heart, as though her feelings and affections were dried up and
withered for ever.

She lived almost entirely alone; she read, she studied, she loved music.
Her principal acquaintances were poor women of various grades, a couple
of actresses, and the family of a poor schoolteacher. Among these people
she was much beloved.

She received four or five friends sometimes, of an evening. Totski
often came. Lately, too, General Epanchin had been enabled with
great difficulty to introduce himself into her circle. Gania made
her acquaintance also, and others were Ferdishenko, an ill-bred, and
would-be witty, young clerk, and Ptitsin, a money-lender of modest
and polished manners, who had risen from poverty. In fact, Nastasia
Philipovna's beauty became a thing known to all the town; but not a
single man could boast of anything more than his own admiration for
her; and this reputation of hers, and her wit and culture and grace, all
confirmed Totski in the plan he had now prepared.

And it was at this moment that General Epanchin began to play so large
and important a part in the story.

When Totski had approached the general with his request for friendly
counsel as to a marriage with one of his daughters, he had made a full
and candid confession. He had said that he intended to stop at no means
to obtain his freedom; even if Nastasia were to promise to leave him
entirely alone in future, he would not (he said) believe and trust her;
words were not enough for him; he must have solid guarantees of some
sort. So he and the general determined to try what an attempt to appeal
to her heart would effect. Having arrived at Nastasia's house one day,
with Epanchin, Totski immediately began to speak of the intolerable
torment of his position. He admitted that he was to blame for all, but
candidly confessed that he could not bring himself to feel any remorse
for his original guilt towards herself, because he was a man of sensual
passions which were inborn and ineradicable, and that he had no power
over himself in this respect; but that he wished, seriously, to marry at
last, and that the whole fate of the most desirable social union which
he contemplated, was in her hands; in a word, he confided his all to her
generosity of heart.

General Epanchin took up his part and spoke in the character of father
of a family; he spoke sensibly, and without wasting words over any
attempt at sentimentality, he merely recorded his full admission of
her right to be the arbiter of Totski's destiny at this moment. He then
pointed out that the fate of his daughter, and very likely of both his
other daughters, now hung upon her reply.

To Nastasia's question as to what they wished her to do, Totski
confessed that he had been so frightened by her, five years ago, that
he could never now be entirely comfortable until she herself married. He
immediately added that such a suggestion from him would, of course, be
absurd, unless accompanied by remarks of a more pointed nature. He
very well knew, he said, that a certain young gentleman of good family,
namely, Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin, with whom she was acquainted,
and whom she received at her house, had long loved her passionately,
and would give his life for some response from her. The young fellow had
confessed this love of his to him (Totski) and had also admitted it in
the hearing of his benefactor, General Epanchin. Lastly, he could not
help being of opinion that Nastasia must be aware of Gania's love for
her, and if he (Totski) mistook not, she had looked with some favour
upon it, being often lonely, and rather tired of her present life.
Having remarked how difficult it was for him, of all people, to speak
to her of these matters, Totski concluded by saying that he trusted
Nastasia Philipovna would not look with contempt upon him if he now
expressed his sincere desire to guarantee her future by a gift of
seventy-five thousand roubles. He added that the sum would have been
left her all the same in his will, and that therefore she must not
consider the gift as in any way an indemnification to her for anything,
but that there was no reason, after all, why a man should not be allowed
to entertain a natural desire to lighten his conscience, etc., etc.; in
fact, all that would naturally be said under the circumstances. Totski
was very eloquent all through, and, in conclusion, just touched on the
fact that not a soul in the world, not even General Epanchin, had ever
heard a word about the above seventy-five thousand roubles, and that
this was the first time he had ever given expression to his intentions
in respect to them.

Nastasia Philipovna's reply to this long rigmarole astonished both the
friends considerably.

Not only was there no trace of her former irony, of her old hatred and
enmity, and of that dreadful laughter, the very recollection of which
sent a cold chill down Totski's back to this very day; but she seemed
charmed and really glad to have the opportunity of talking seriously
with him for once in a way. She confessed that she had long wished to
have a frank and free conversation and to ask for friendly advice, but
that pride had hitherto prevented her; now, however, that the ice was
broken, nothing could be more welcome to her than this opportunity.

First, with a sad smile, and then with a twinkle of merriment in her
eyes, she admitted that such a storm as that of five years ago was now
quite out of the question. She said that she had long since changed
her views of things, and recognized that facts must be taken into
consideration in spite of the feelings of the heart. What was done was
done and ended, and she could not understand why Totski should still
feel alarmed.

She next turned to General Epanchin and observed, most courteously, that
she had long since known of his daughters, and that she had heard none
but good report; that she had learned to think of them with deep and
sincere respect. The idea alone that she could in any way serve them,
would be to her both a pride and a source of real happiness.

It was true that she was lonely in her present life; Totski had judged
her thoughts aright. She longed to rise, if not to love, at least to
family life and new hopes and objects, but as to Gavrila Ardalionovitch,
she could not as yet say much. She thought it must be the case that he
loved her; she felt that she too might learn to love him, if she could
be sure of the firmness of his attachment to herself; but he was very
young, and it was a difficult question to decide. What she specially
liked about him was that he worked, and supported his family by his
toil.

She had heard that he was proud and ambitious; she had heard much that
was interesting of his mother and sister, she had heard of them from Mr.
Ptitsin, and would much like to make their acquaintance, but--another
question!--would they like to receive her into their house? At all
events, though she did not reject the idea of this marriage, she desired
not to be hurried. As for the seventy-five thousand roubles, Mr. Totski
need not have found any difficulty or awkwardness about the matter; she
quite understood the value of money, and would, of course, accept the
gift. She thanked him for his delicacy, however, but saw no reason why
Gavrila Ardalionovitch should not know about it.

She would not marry the latter, she said, until she felt persuaded that
neither on his part nor on the part of his family did there exist any
sort of concealed suspicions as to herself. She did not intend to ask
forgiveness for anything in the past, which fact she desired to be
known. She did not consider herself to blame for anything that had
happened in former years, and she thought that Gavrila Ardalionovitch
should be informed as to the relations which had existed between herself
and Totski during the last five years. If she accepted this money it was
not to be considered as indemnification for her misfortune as a young
girl, which had not been in any degree her own fault, but merely as
compensation for her ruined life.

She became so excited and agitated during all these explanations and
confessions that General Epanchin was highly gratified, and considered
the matter satisfactorily arranged once for all. But the once bitten
Totski was twice shy, and looked for hidden snakes among the flowers.
However, the special point to which the two friends particularly trusted
to bring about their object (namely, Gania's attractiveness for Nastasia
Philipovna), stood out more and more prominently; the pourparlers had
commenced, and gradually even Totski began to believe in the possibility
of success.

Before long Nastasia and Gania had talked the matter over. Very
little was said--her modesty seemed to suffer under the infliction
of discussing such a question. But she recognized his love, on the
understanding that she bound herself to nothing whatever, and that
she reserved the right to say "no" up to the very hour of the marriage
ceremony. Gania was to have the same right of refusal at the last
moment.

It soon became clear to Gania, after scenes of wrath and quarrellings
at the domestic hearth, that his family were seriously opposed to the
match, and that Nastasia was aware of this fact was equally evident. She
said nothing about it, though he daily expected her to do so.

There were several rumours afloat, before long, which upset Totski's
equanimity a good deal, but we will not now stop to describe them;
merely mentioning an instance or two. One was that Nastasia had entered
into close and secret relations with the Epanchin girls--a most unlikely
rumour; another was that Nastasia had long satisfied herself of the fact
that Gania was merely marrying her for money, and that his nature was
gloomy and greedy, impatient and selfish, to an extraordinary degree;
and that although he had been keen enough in his desire to achieve a
conquest before, yet since the two friends had agreed to exploit his
passion for their own purposes, it was clear enough that he had begun to
consider the whole thing a nuisance and a nightmare.

In his heart passion and hate seemed to hold divided sway, and although
he had at last given his consent to marry the woman (as he said), under
the stress of circumstances, yet he promised himself that he would "take
it out of her," after marriage.

Nastasia seemed to Totski to have divined all this, and to be preparing
something on her own account, which frightened him to such an extent
that he did not dare communicate his views even to the general. But at
times he would pluck up his courage and be full of hope and good spirits
again, acting, in fact, as weak men do act in such circumstances.

However, both the friends felt that the thing looked rosy indeed when
one day Nastasia informed them that she would give her final answer on
the evening of her birthday, which anniversary was due in a very short
time.

A strange rumour began to circulate, meanwhile; no less than that
the respectable and highly respected General Epanchin was himself so
fascinated by Nastasia Philipovna that his feeling for her amounted
almost to passion. What he thought to gain by Gania's marriage to
the girl it was difficult to imagine. Possibly he counted on Gania's
complaisance; for Totski had long suspected that there existed some
secret understanding between the general and his secretary. At all
events the fact was known that he had prepared a magnificent present of
pearls for Nastasia's birthday, and that he was looking forward to the
occasion when he should present his gift with the greatest excitement
and impatience. The day before her birthday he was in a fever of
agitation.

Mrs. Epanchin, long accustomed to her husband's infidelities, had
heard of the pearls, and the rumour excited her liveliest curiosity and
interest. The general remarked her suspicions, and felt that a grand
explanation must shortly take place--which fact alarmed him much.

This is the reason why he was so unwilling to take lunch (on the morning
upon which we took up this narrative) with the rest of his family.
Before the prince's arrival he had made up his mind to plead business,
and "cut" the meal; which simply meant running away.

He was particularly anxious that this one day should be
passed--especially the evening--without unpleasantness between himself
and his family; and just at the right moment the prince turned up--"as
though Heaven had sent him on purpose," said the general to himself, as
he left the study to seek out the wife of his bosom.

V.

Mrs. General Epanchin was a proud woman by nature. What must her
feelings have been when she heard that Prince Muishkin, the last of
his and her line, had arrived in beggar's guise, a wretched idiot, a
recipient of charity--all of which details the general gave out for
greater effect! He was anxious to steal her interest at the first swoop,
so as to distract her thoughts from other matters nearer home.

Mrs. Epanchin was in the habit of holding herself very straight, and
staring before her, without speaking, in moments of excitement.

She was a fine woman of the same age as her husband, with a slightly
hooked nose, a high, narrow forehead, thick hair turning a little grey,
and a sallow complexion. Her eyes were grey and wore a very curious
expression at times. She believed them to be most effective--a belief
that nothing could alter.

"What, receive him! Now, at once?" asked Mrs. Epanchin, gazing vaguely
at her husband as he stood fidgeting before her.

"Oh, dear me, I assure you there is no need to stand on ceremony with
him," the general explained hastily. "He is quite a child, not to say
a pathetic-looking creature. He has fits of some sort, and has just
arrived from Switzerland, straight from the station, dressed like a
German and without a farthing in his pocket. I gave him twenty-five
roubles to go on with, and am going to find him some easy place in one
of the government offices. I should like you to ply him well with the
victuals, my dears, for I should think he must be very hungry."

"You astonish me," said the lady, gazing as before. "Fits, and hungry
too! What sort of fits?"

"Oh, they don't come on frequently, besides, he's a regular child,
though he seems to be fairly educated. I should like you, if possible,
my dears," the general added, making slowly for the door, "to put him
through his paces a bit, and see what he is good for. I think you should
be kind to him; it is a good deed, you know--however, just as you like,
of course--but he is a sort of relation, remember, and I thought it
might interest you to see the young fellow, seeing that this is so."

"Oh, of course, mamma, if we needn't stand on ceremony with him, we must
give the poor fellow something to eat after his journey; especially as
he has not the least idea where to go to," said Alexandra, the eldest of
the girls.

"Besides, he's quite a child; we can entertain him with a little
hide-and-seek, in case of need," said Adelaida.

"Hide-and-seek? What do you mean?" inquired Mrs. Epanchin.

"Oh, do stop pretending, mamma," cried Aglaya, in vexation. "Send him
up, father; mother allows."

The general rang the bell and gave orders that the prince should be
shown in.

"Only on condition that he has a napkin under his chin at lunch, then,"
said Mrs. Epanchin, "and let Fedor, or Mavra, stand behind him while he
eats. Is he quiet when he has these fits? He doesn't show violence, does
he?"

"On the contrary, he seems to be very well brought up. His manners
are excellent--but here he is himself. Here you are, prince--let me
introduce you, the last of the Muishkins, a relative of your own, my
dear, or at least of the same name. Receive him kindly, please. They'll
bring in lunch directly, prince; you must stop and have some, but you
must excuse me. I'm in a hurry, I must be off--"

"We all know where YOU must be off to!" said Mrs. Epanchin, in a meaning
voice.

"Yes, yes--I must hurry away, I'm late! Look here, dears, let him
write you something in your albums; you've no idea what a wonderful
caligraphist he is, wonderful talent! He has just written out 'Abbot
Pafnute signed this' for me. Well, au revoir!"

"Stop a minute; where are you off to? Who is this abbot?" cried Mrs.
Epanchin to her retreating husband in a tone of excited annoyance.

"Yes, my dear, it was an old abbot of that name-I must be off to see the
count, he's waiting for me, I'm late--Good-bye! Au revoir, prince!"--and
the general bolted at full speed.

"Oh, yes--I know what count you're going to see!" remarked his wife in
a cutting manner, as she turned her angry eyes on the prince. "Now
then, what's all this about?--What abbot--Who's Pafnute?" she added,
brusquely.

"Mamma!" said Alexandra, shocked at her rudeness.

Aglaya stamped her foot.

"Nonsense! Let me alone!" said the angry mother. "Now then, prince, sit
down here, no, nearer, come nearer the light! I want to have a good look
at you. So, now then, who is this abbot?"

"Abbot Pafnute," said our friend, seriously and with deference.

"Pafnute, yes. And who was he?"

Mrs. Epanchin put these questions hastily and brusquely, and when the
prince answered she nodded her head sagely at each word he said.

"The Abbot Pafnute lived in the fourteenth century," began the prince;
"he was in charge of one of the monasteries on the Volga, about where
our present Kostroma government lies. He went to Oreol and helped in the
great matters then going on in the religious world; he signed an edict
there, and I have seen a print of his signature; it struck me, so I
copied it. When the general asked me, in his study, to write something
for him, to show my handwriting, I wrote 'The Abbot Pafnute signed
this,' in the exact handwriting of the abbot. The general liked it very
much, and that's why he recalled it just now."

"Aglaya, make a note of 'Pafnute,' or we shall forget him. H'm! and
where is this signature?"

"I think it was left on the general's table."

"Let it be sent for at once!"

"Oh, I'll write you a new one in half a minute," said the prince, "if
you like!"

"Of course, mamma!" said Alexandra. "But let's have lunch now, we are
all hungry!"

"Yes; come along, prince," said the mother, "are you very hungry?"

"Yes; I must say that I am pretty hungry, thanks very much."

"H'm! I like to see that you know your manners; and you are by no means
such a person as the general thought fit to describe you. Come along;
you sit here, opposite to me," she continued, "I wish to be able to see
your face. Alexandra, Adelaida, look after the prince! He doesn't seem
so very ill, does he? I don't think he requires a napkin under his chin,
after all; are you accustomed to having one on, prince?"

"Formerly, when I was seven years old or so. I believe I wore one; but
now I usually hold my napkin on my knee when I eat."

"Of course, of course! And about your fits?"

"Fits?" asked the prince, slightly surprised. "I very seldom have fits
nowadays. I don't know how it may be here, though; they say the climate
may be bad for me."

"He talks very well, you know!" said Mrs. Epanchin, who still continued
to nod at each word the prince spoke. "I really did not expect it at
all; in fact, I suppose it was all stuff and nonsense on the general's
part, as usual. Eat away, prince, and tell me where you were born, and
where you were brought up. I wish to know all about you, you interest me
very much!"

The prince expressed his thanks once more, and eating heartily the
while, recommenced the narrative of his life in Switzerland, all of
which we have heard before. Mrs. Epanchin became more and more pleased
with her guest; the girls, too, listened with considerable attention. In
talking over the question of relationship it turned out that the prince
was very well up in the matter and knew his pedigree off by heart. It
was found that scarcely any connection existed between himself and Mrs.
Epanchin, but the talk, and the opportunity of conversing about her
family tree, gratified the latter exceedingly, and she rose from the
table in great good humour.

"Let's all go to my boudoir," she said, "and they shall bring some
coffee in there. That's the room where we all assemble and busy
ourselves as we like best," she explained. "Alexandra, my eldest,
here, plays the piano, or reads or sews; Adelaida paints landscapes and
portraits (but never finishes any); and Aglaya sits and does nothing.
I don't work too much, either. Here we are, now; sit down, prince, near
the fire and talk to us. I want to hear you relate something. I wish
to make sure of you first and then tell my old friend, Princess
Bielokonski, about you. I wish you to know all the good people and to
interest them. Now then, begin!"

"Mamma, it's rather a strange order, that!" said Adelaida, who was
fussing among her paints and paint-brushes at the easel. Aglaya and
Alexandra had settled themselves with folded hands on a sofa, evidently
meaning to be listeners. The prince felt that the general attention was
concentrated upon himself.

"I should refuse to say a word if I were ordered to tell a story like
that!" observed Aglaya.

"Why? what's there strange about it? He has a tongue. Why shouldn't he
tell us something? I want to judge whether he is a good story-teller;
anything you like, prince-how you liked Switzerland, what was your first
impression, anything. You'll see, he'll begin directly and tell us all
about it beautifully."

"The impression was forcible--" the prince began.

"There, you see, girls," said the impatient lady, "he has begun, you
see."

"Well, then, LET him talk, mamma," said Alexandra. "This prince is a
great humbug and by no means an idiot," she whispered to Aglaya.

"Oh, I saw that at once," replied the latter. "I don't think it at all
nice of him to play a part. What does he wish to gain by it, I wonder?"

"My first impression was a very strong one," repeated the prince. "When
they took me away from Russia, I remember I passed through many German
towns and looked out of the windows, but did not trouble so much as to
ask questions about them. This was after a long series of fits. I always
used to fall into a sort of torpid condition after such a series, and
lost my memory almost entirely; and though I was not altogether without
reason at such times, yet I had no logical power of thought. This would
continue for three or four days, and then I would recover myself again.
I remember my melancholy was intolerable; I felt inclined to cry; I
sat and wondered and wondered uncomfortably; the consciousness that
everything was strange weighed terribly upon me; I could understand that
it was all foreign and strange. I recollect I awoke from this state for
the first time at Basle, one evening; the bray of a donkey aroused me,
a donkey in the town market. I saw the donkey and was extremely pleased
with it, and from that moment my head seemed to clear."

"A donkey? How strange! Yet it is not strange. Anyone of us might fall
in love with a donkey! It happened in mythological times," said Madame
Epanchin, looking wrathfully at her daughters, who had begun to laugh.
"Go on, prince."

"Since that evening I have been specially fond of donkeys. I began to
ask questions about them, for I had never seen one before; and I at
once came to the conclusion that this must be one of the most useful of
animals--strong, willing, patient, cheap; and, thanks to this donkey,
I began to like the whole country I was travelling through; and my
melancholy passed away."

"All this is very strange and interesting," said Mrs. Epanchin. "Now
let's leave the donkey and go on to other matters. What are you laughing
at, Aglaya? and you too, Adelaida? The prince told us his experiences
very cleverly; he saw the donkey himself, and what have you ever seen?
YOU have never been abroad."

"I have seen a donkey though, mamma!" said Aglaya.

"And I've heard one!" said Adelaida. All three of the girls laughed out
loud, and the prince laughed with them.

"Well, it's too bad of you," said mamma. "You must forgive them, prince;
they are good girls. I am very fond of them, though I often have to be
scolding them; they are all as silly and mad as march hares."

"Oh, why shouldn't they laugh?" said the prince. "I shouldn't have let
the chance go by in their place, I know. But I stick up for the donkey,
all the same; he's a patient, good-natured fellow."

"Are you a patient man, prince? I ask out of curiosity," said Mrs.
Epanchin.

All laughed again.

"Oh, that wretched donkey again, I see!" cried the lady. "I assure you,
prince, I was not guilty of the least--"

"Insinuation? Oh! I assure you, I take your word for it." And the prince
continued laughing merrily.

"I must say it's very nice of you to laugh. I see you really are a
kind-hearted fellow," said Mrs. Epanchin.

"I'm not always kind, though."

"I am kind myself, and ALWAYS kind too, if you please!" she retorted,
unexpectedly; "and that is my chief fault, for one ought not to be
always kind. I am often angry with these girls and their father; but the
worst of it is, I am always kindest when I am cross. I was very angry
just before you came, and Aglaya there read me a lesson--thanks, Aglaya,
dear--come and kiss me--there--that's enough" she added, as Aglaya came
forward and kissed her lips and then her hand. "Now then, go on, prince.
Perhaps you can think of something more exciting than about the donkey,
eh?"

"I must say, again, I can't understand how you can expect anyone to tell
you stories straight away, so," said Adelaida. "I know I never could!"

"Yes, but the prince can, because he is clever--cleverer than you are
by ten or twenty times, if you like. There, that's so, prince; and
seriously, let's drop the donkey now--what else did you see abroad,
besides the donkey?"

"Yes, but the prince told us about the donkey very cleverly, all the
same," said Alexandra. "I have always been most interested to hear how
people go mad and get well again, and that sort of thing. Especially
when it happens suddenly."

"Quite so, quite so!" cried Mrs. Epanchin, delighted. "I see you CAN
be sensible now and then, Alexandra. You were speaking of Switzerland,
prince?"

"Yes. We came to Lucerne, and I was taken out in a boat. I felt how
lovely it was, but the loveliness weighed upon me somehow or other, and
made me feel melancholy."

"Why?" asked Alexandra.

"I don't know; I always feel like that when I look at the beauties of
nature for the first time; but then, I was ill at that time, of course!"

"Oh, but I should like to see it!" said Adelaida; "and I don't know
WHEN we shall ever go abroad. I've been two years looking out for a good
subject for a picture. I've done all I know. 'The North and South I know
by heart,' as our poet observes. Do help me to a subject, prince."

"Oh, but I know nothing about painting. It seems to me one only has to
look, and paint what one sees."

"But I don't know HOW to see!"

"Nonsense, what rubbish you talk!" the mother struck in. "Not know how
to see! Open your eyes and look! If you can't see here, you won't see
abroad either. Tell us what you saw yourself, prince!"

"Yes, that's better," said Adelaida; "the prince learned to see abroad."

"Oh, I hardly know! You see, I only went to restore my health. I don't
know whether I learned to see, exactly. I was very happy, however,
nearly all the time."

"Happy! you can be happy?" cried Aglaya. "Then how can you say you did
not learn to see? I should think you could teach us to see!"

"Oh! DO teach us," laughed Adelaida.

"Oh! I can't do that," said the prince, laughing too. "I lived almost
all the while in one little Swiss village; what can I teach you? At
first I was only just not absolutely dull; then my health began to
improve--then every day became dearer and more precious to me, and the
longer I stayed, the dearer became the time to me; so much so that I
could not help observing it; but why this was so, it would be difficult
to say."

"So that you didn't care to go away anywhere else?"

"Well, at first I did; I was restless; I didn't know however I should
manage to support life--you know there are such moments, especially in
solitude. There was a waterfall near us, such a lovely thin streak of
water, like a thread but white and moving. It fell from a great height,
but it looked quite low, and it was half a mile away, though it did not
seem fifty paces. I loved to listen to it at night, but it was then
that I became so restless. Sometimes I went and climbed the mountain and
stood there in the midst of the tall pines, all alone in the terrible
silence, with our little village in the distance, and the sky so blue,
and the sun so bright, and an old ruined castle on the mountain-side,
far away. I used to watch the line where earth and sky met, and longed
to go and seek there the key of all mysteries, thinking that I might
find there a new life, perhaps some great city where life should be
grander and richer--and then it struck me that life may be grand enough
even in a prison."

"I read that last most praiseworthy thought in my manual, when I was
twelve years old," said Aglaya.

"All this is pure philosophy," said Adelaida. "You are a philosopher,
prince, and have come here to instruct us in your views."

"Perhaps you are right," said the prince, smiling. "I think I am a
philosopher, perhaps, and who knows, perhaps I do wish to teach my views
of things to those I meet with?"

"Your philosophy is rather like that of an old woman we know, who is
rich and yet does nothing but try how little she can spend. She talks of
nothing but money all day. Your great philosophical idea of a grand life
in a prison and your four happy years in that Swiss village are like
this, rather," said Aglaya.

"As to life in a prison, of course there may be two opinions," said the
prince. "I once heard the story of a man who lived twelve years in a
prison--I heard it from the man himself. He was one of the persons under
treatment with my professor; he had fits, and attacks of melancholy,
then he would weep, and once he tried to commit suicide. HIS life in
prison was sad enough; his only acquaintances were spiders and a tree
that grew outside his grating-but I think I had better tell you of
another man I met last year. There was a very strange feature in this
case, strange because of its extremely rare occurrence. This man had
once been brought to the scaffold in company with several others, and
had had the sentence of death by shooting passed upon him for some
political crime. Twenty minutes later he had been reprieved and
some other punishment substituted; but the interval between the two
sentences, twenty minutes, or at least a quarter of an hour, had been
passed in the certainty that within a few minutes he must die. I was
very anxious to hear him speak of his impressions during that dreadful
time, and I several times inquired of him as to what he thought and
felt. He remembered everything with the most accurate and extraordinary
distinctness, and declared that he would never forget a single iota of
the experience.

"About twenty paces from the scaffold, where he had stood to hear the
sentence, were three posts, fixed in the ground, to which to fasten the
criminals (of whom there were several). The first three criminals were
taken to the posts, dressed in long white tunics, with white caps drawn
over their faces, so that they could not see the rifles pointed at them.
Then a group of soldiers took their stand opposite to each post. My
friend was the eighth on the list, and therefore he would have been
among the third lot to go up. A priest went about among them with a
cross: and there was about five minutes of time left for him to live.

"He said that those five minutes seemed to him to be a most interminable
period, an enormous wealth of time; he seemed to be living, in these
minutes, so many lives that there was no need as yet to think of that
last moment, so that he made several arrangements, dividing up the time
into portions--one for saying farewell to his companions, two minutes
for that; then a couple more for thinking over his own life and career
and all about himself; and another minute for a last look around. He
remembered having divided his time like this quite well. While saying
good-bye to his friends he recollected asking one of them some very
usual everyday question, and being much interested in the answer. Then
having bade farewell, he embarked upon those two minutes which he had
allotted to looking into himself; he knew beforehand what he was going
to think about. He wished to put it to himself as quickly and clearly
as possible, that here was he, a living, thinking man, and that in three
minutes he would be nobody; or if somebody or something, then what and
where? He thought he would decide this question once for all in these
last three minutes. A little way off there stood a church, and its
gilded spire glittered in the sun. He remembered staring stubbornly at
this spire, and at the rays of light sparkling from it. He could not
tear his eyes from these rays of light; he got the idea that these rays
were his new nature, and that in three minutes he would become one of
them, amalgamated somehow with them.

"The repugnance to what must ensue almost immediately, and the
uncertainty, were dreadful, he said; but worst of all was the idea,
'What should I do if I were not to die now? What if I were to return to
life again? What an eternity of days, and all mine! How I should grudge
and count up every minute of it, so as to waste not a single instant!'
He said that this thought weighed so upon him and became such a terrible
burden upon his brain that he could not bear it, and wished they would
shoot him quickly and have done with it."

The prince paused and all waited, expecting him to go on again and
finish the story.

"Is that all?" asked Aglaya.

"All? Yes," said the prince, emerging from a momentary reverie.

"And why did you tell us this?"

"Oh, I happened to recall it, that's all! It fitted into the
conversation--"

"You probably wish to deduce, prince," said Alexandra, "that moments of
time cannot be reckoned by money value, and that sometimes five minutes
are worth priceless treasures. All this is very praiseworthy; but may I
ask about this friend of yours, who told you the terrible experience of
his life? He was reprieved, you say; in other words, they did restore to
him that 'eternity of days.' What did he do with these riches of time?
Did he keep careful account of his minutes?"

"Oh no, he didn't! I asked him myself. He said that he had not lived a
bit as he had intended, and had wasted many, and many a minute."

"Very well, then there's an experiment, and the thing is proved; one
cannot live and count each moment; say what you like, but one CANNOT."

"That is true," said the prince, "I have thought so myself. And yet, why
shouldn't one do it?"

"You think, then, that you could live more wisely than other people?"
said Aglaya.

"I have had that idea."

"And you have it still?"

"Yes--I have it still," the prince replied.

He had contemplated Aglaya until now, with a pleasant though rather
timid smile, but as the last words fell from his lips he began to laugh,
and looked at her merrily.

"You are not very modest!" said she.

"But how brave you are!" said he. "You are laughing, and I--that man's
tale impressed me so much, that I dreamt of it afterwards; yes, I dreamt
of those five minutes..."

He looked at his listeners again with that same serious, searching
expression.

"You are not angry with me?" he asked suddenly, and with a kind of
nervous hurry, although he looked them straight in the face.

"Why should we be angry?" they cried.

"Only because I seem to be giving you a lecture, all the time!"

At this they laughed heartily.

"Please don't be angry with me," continued the prince. "I know very well
that I have seen less of life than other people, and have less knowledge
of it. I must appear to speak strangely sometimes..."

He said the last words nervously.

"You say you have been happy, and that proves you have lived, not less,
but more than other people. Why make all these excuses?" interrupted
Aglaya in a mocking tone of voice. "Besides, you need not mind about
lecturing us; you have nothing to boast of. With your quietism, one
could live happily for a hundred years at least. One might show you the
execution of a felon, or show you one's little finger. You could draw
a moral from either, and be quite satisfied. That sort of existence is
easy enough."

"I can't understand why you always fly into a temper," said Mrs.
Epanchin, who had been listening to the conversation and examining the
faces of the speakers in turn. "I do not understand what you mean. What
has your little finger to do with it? The prince talks well, though he
is not amusing. He began all right, but now he seems sad."

"Never mind, mamma! Prince, I wish you had seen an execution," said
Aglaya. "I should like to ask you a question about that, if you had."

"I have seen an execution," said the prince.

"You have!" cried Aglaya. "I might have guessed it. That's a fitting
crown to the rest of the story. If you have seen an execution, how can
you say you lived happily all the while?"

"But is there capital punishment where you were?" asked Adelaida.

"I saw it at Lyons. Schneider took us there, and as soon as we arrived
we came in for that."

"Well, and did you like it very much? Was it very edifying and
instructive?" asked Aglaya.

"No, I didn't like it at all, and was ill after seeing it; but I confess
I stared as though my eyes were fixed to the sight. I could not tear
them away."

"I, too, should have been unable to tear my eyes away," said Aglaya.

"They do not at all approve of women going to see an execution there.
The women who do go are condemned for it afterwards in the newspapers."

"That is, by contending that it is not a sight for women they admit that
it is a sight for men. I congratulate them on the deduction. I suppose
you quite agree with them, prince?"

"Tell us about the execution," put in Adelaida.

"I would much rather not, just now," said the prince, a little disturbed
and frowning slightly.

"You don't seem to want to tell us," said Aglaya, with a mocking air.

"No,--the thing is, I was telling all about the execution a little while
ago, and--"

"Whom did you tell about it?"

"The man-servant, while I was waiting to see the general."

"Our man-servant?" exclaimed several voices at once.

"Yes, the one who waits in the entrance hall, a greyish, red-faced
man--"

"The prince is clearly a democrat," remarked Aglaya.

"Well, if you could tell Aleksey about it, surely you can tell us too."

"I do so want to hear about it," repeated Adelaida.

"Just now, I confess," began the prince, with more animation, "when you
asked me for a subject for a picture, I confess I had serious thoughts
of giving you one. I thought of asking you to draw the face of a
criminal, one minute before the fall of the guillotine, while the
wretched man is still standing on the scaffold, preparatory to placing
his neck on the block."

"What, his face? only his face?" asked Adelaida. "That would be a
strange subject indeed. And what sort of a picture would that make?"

"Oh, why not?" the prince insisted, with some warmth. "When I was in
Basle I saw a picture very much in that style--I should like to tell you
about it; I will some time or other; it struck me very forcibly."

"Oh, you shall tell us about the Basle picture another time; now we must
have all about the execution," said Adelaida. "Tell us about that face
as; it appeared to your imagination-how should it be drawn?--just the
face alone, do you mean?"

"It was just a minute before the execution," began the prince, readily,
carried away by the recollection and evidently forgetting everything
else in a moment; "just at the instant when he stepped off the ladder on
to the scaffold. He happened to look in my direction: I saw his eyes and
understood all, at once--but how am I to describe it? I do so wish you
or somebody else could draw it, you, if possible. I thought at the time
what a picture it would make. You must imagine all that went before, of
course, all--all. He had lived in the prison for some time and had not
expected that the execution would take place for at least a week yet--he
had counted on all the formalities and so on taking time; but it so
happened that his papers had been got ready quickly. At five o'clock in
the morning he was asleep--it was October, and at five in the morning
it was cold and dark. The governor of the prison comes in on tip-toe and
touches the sleeping man's shoulder gently. He starts up. 'What is it?'
he says. 'The execution is fixed for ten o'clock.' He was only just
awake, and would not believe at first, but began to argue that his
papers would not be out for a week, and so on. When he was wide awake
and realized the truth, he became very silent and argued no more--so
they say; but after a bit he said: 'It comes very hard on one so
suddenly' and then he was silent again and said nothing.

"The three or four hours went by, of course, in necessary
preparations--the priest, breakfast, (coffee, meat, and some wine they
gave him; doesn't it seem ridiculous?) And yet I believe these people
give them a good breakfast out of pure kindness of heart, and believe
that they are doing a good action. Then he is dressed, and then begins
the procession through the town to the scaffold. I think he, too,
must feel that he has an age to live still while they cart him along.
Probably he thought, on the way, 'Oh, I have a long, long time yet.
Three streets of life yet! When we've passed this street there'll be
that other one; and then that one where the baker's shop is on the
right; and when shall we get there? It's ages, ages!' Around him are
crowds shouting, yelling--ten thousand faces, twenty thousand eyes.
All this has to be endured, and especially the thought: 'Here are ten
thousand men, and not one of them is going to be executed, and yet I am
to die.' Well, all that is preparatory.

"At the scaffold there is a ladder, and just there he burst into
tears--and this was a strong man, and a terribly wicked one, they say!
There was a priest with him the whole time, talking; even in the cart
as they drove along, he talked and talked. Probably the other heard
nothing; he would begin to listen now and then, and at the third word or
so he had forgotten all about it.

"At last he began to mount the steps; his legs were tied, so that he had
to take very small steps. The priest, who seemed to be a wise man, had
stopped talking now, and only held the cross for the wretched fellow to
kiss. At the foot of the ladder he had been pale enough; but when he set
foot on the scaffold at the top, his face suddenly became the colour
of paper, positively like white notepaper. His legs must have become
suddenly feeble and helpless, and he felt a choking in his throat--you
know the sudden feeling one has in moments of terrible fear, when one
does not lose one's wits, but is absolutely powerless to move? If some
dreadful thing were suddenly to happen; if a house were just about to
fall on one;--don't you know how one would long to sit down and shut
one's eyes and wait, and wait? Well, when this terrible feeling came
over him, the priest quickly pressed the cross to his lips, without a
word--a little silver cross it was-and he kept on pressing it to the
man's lips every second. And whenever the cross touched his lips, the
eyes would open for a moment, and the legs moved once, and he kissed the
cross greedily, hurriedly--just as though he were anxious to catch hold
of something in case of its being useful to him afterwards, though he
could hardly have had any connected religious thoughts at the time. And
so up to the very block.

"How strange that criminals seldom swoon at such a moment! On
the contrary, the brain is especially active, and works
incessantly--probably hard, hard, hard--like an engine at full pressure.
I imagine that various thoughts must beat loud and fast through
his head--all unfinished ones, and strange, funny thoughts, very
likely!--like this, for instance: 'That man is looking at me, and he
has a wart on his forehead! and the executioner has burst one of his
buttons, and the lowest one is all rusty!' And meanwhile he notices and
remembers everything. There is one point that cannot be forgotten, round
which everything else dances and turns about; and because of this
point he cannot faint, and this lasts until the very final quarter of
a second, when the wretched neck is on the block and the victim listens
and waits and KNOWS--that's the point, he KNOWS that he is just NOW
about to die, and listens for the rasp of the iron over his head. If I
lay there, I should certainly listen for that grating sound, and hear
it, too! There would probably be but the tenth part of an instant left
to hear it in, but one would certainly hear it. And imagine, some people
declare that when the head flies off it is CONSCIOUS of having flown
off! Just imagine what a thing to realize! Fancy if consciousness were
to last for even five seconds!

"Draw the scaffold so that only the top step of the ladder comes in
clearly. The criminal must be just stepping on to it, his face as white
as note-paper. The priest is holding the cross to his blue lips, and the
criminal kisses it, and knows and sees and understands everything.
The cross and the head--there's your picture; the priest and the
executioner, with his two assistants, and a few heads and eyes below.
Those might come in as subordinate accessories--a sort of mist. There's
a picture for you." The prince paused, and looked around.

"Certainly that isn't much like quietism," murmured Alexandra, half to
herself.

"Now tell us about your love affairs," said Adelaida, after a moment's
pause.

The prince gazed at her in amazement.

"You know," Adelaida continued, "you owe us a description of the Basle
picture; but first I wish to hear how you fell in love. Don't deny the
fact, for you did, of course. Besides, you stop philosophizing when you
are telling about anything."

"Why are you ashamed of your stories the moment after you have told
them?" asked Aglaya, suddenly.

"How silly you are!" said Mrs. Epanchin, looking indignantly towards the
last speaker.

"Yes, that wasn't a clever remark," said Alexandra.

"Don't listen to her, prince," said Mrs. Epanchin; "she says that sort
of thing out of mischief. Don't think anything of their nonsense, it
means nothing. They love to chaff, but they like you. I can see it in
their faces--I know their faces."

"I know their faces, too," said the prince, with a peculiar stress on
the words.

"How so?" asked Adelaida, with curiosity.

"What do YOU know about our faces?" exclaimed the other two, in chorus.

But the prince was silent and serious. All awaited his reply.

"I'll tell you afterwards," he said quietly.

"Ah, you want to arouse our curiosity!" said Aglaya. "And how terribly
solemn you are about it!"

"Very well," interrupted Adelaida, "then if you can read faces so well,
you must have been in love. Come now; I've guessed--let's have the
secret!"

"I have not been in love," said the prince, as quietly and seriously as
before. "I have been happy in another way."

"How, how?"

"Well, I'll tell you," said the prince, apparently in a deep reverie.

VI.

"Here you all are," began the prince, "settling yourselves down to
listen to me with so much curiosity, that if I do not satisfy you you
will probably be angry with me. No, no! I'm only joking!" he added,
hastily, with a smile.

"Well, then--they were all children there, and I was always among
children and only with children. They were the children of the village
in which I lived, and they went to the school there--all of them. I did
not teach them, oh no; there was a master for that, one Jules Thibaut.
I may have taught them some things, but I was among them just as an
outsider, and I passed all four years of my life there among them.
I wished for nothing better; I used to tell them everything and hid
nothing from them. Their fathers and relations were very angry with me,
because the children could do nothing without me at last, and used to
throng after me at all times. The schoolmaster was my greatest enemy
in the end! I had many enemies, and all because of the children. Even
Schneider reproached me. What were they afraid of? One can tell a child
everything, anything. I have often been struck by the fact that parents
know their children so little. They should not conceal so much from
them. How well even little children understand that their parents
conceal things from them, because they consider them too young to
understand! Children are capable of giving advice in the most important
matters. How can one deceive these dear little birds, when they look
at one so sweetly and confidingly? I call them birds because there is
nothing in the world better than birds!

"However, most of the people were angry with me about one and the same
thing; but Thibaut simply was jealous of me. At first he had wagged his
head and wondered how it was that the children understood what I told
them so well, and could not learn from him; and he laughed like anything
when I replied that neither he nor I could teach them very much, but
that THEY might teach us a good deal.

"How he could hate me and tell scandalous stories about me, living among
children as he did, is what I cannot understand. Children soothe and
heal the wounded heart. I remember there was one poor fellow at our
professor's who was being treated for madness, and you have no idea what
those children did for him, eventually. I don't think he was mad, but
only terribly unhappy. But I'll tell you all about him another day. Now
I must get on with this story.

"The children did not love me at first; I was such a sickly, awkward
kind of a fellow then--and I know I am ugly. Besides, I was a foreigner.
The children used to laugh at me, at first; and they even went so far
as to throw stones at me, when they saw me kiss Marie. I only kissed her
once in my life--no, no, don't laugh!" The prince hastened to suppress
the smiles of his audience at this point. "It was not a matter of LOVE
at all! If only you knew what a miserable creature she was, you would
have pitied her, just as I did. She belonged to our village. Her mother
was an old, old woman, and they used to sell string and thread, and soap
and tobacco, out of the window of their little house, and lived on the
pittance they gained by this trade. The old woman was ill and very old,
and could hardly move. Marie was her daughter, a girl of twenty, weak
and thin and consumptive; but still she did heavy work at the houses
around, day by day. Well, one fine day a commercial traveller betrayed
her and carried her off; and a week later he deserted her. She came home
dirty, draggled, and shoeless; she had walked for a whole week without
shoes; she had slept in the fields, and caught a terrible cold; her feet
were swollen and sore, and her hands torn and scratched all over. She
never had been pretty even before; but her eyes were quiet, innocent,
kind eyes.

"She was very quiet always--and I remember once, when she had suddenly
begun singing at her work, everyone said, 'Marie tried to sing today!'
and she got so chaffed that she was silent for ever after. She had been
treated kindly in the place before; but when she came back now--ill and
shunned and miserable--not one of them all had the slightest sympathy
for her. Cruel people! Oh, what hazy understandings they have on such
matters! Her mother was the first to show the way. She received her
wrathfully, unkindly, and with contempt. 'You have disgraced me,' she
said. She was the first to cast her into ignominy; but when they all
heard that Marie had returned to the village, they ran out to see
her and crowded into the little cottage--old men, children, women,
girls--such a hurrying, stamping, greedy crowd. Marie was lying on
the floor at the old woman's feet, hungry, torn, draggled, crying,
miserable.

"When everyone crowded into the room she hid her face in her dishevelled
hair and lay cowering on the floor. Everyone looked at her as though she
were a piece of dirt off the road. The old men scolded and condemned,
and the young ones laughed at her. The women condemned her too, and
looked at her contemptuously, just as though she were some loathsome
insect.

"Her mother allowed all this to go on, and nodded her head and
encouraged them. The old woman was very ill at that time, and knew she
was dying (she really did die a couple of months later), and though she
felt the end approaching she never thought of forgiving her daughter, to
the very day of her death. She would not even speak to her. She made
her sleep on straw in a shed, and hardly gave her food enough to support
life.

"Marie was very gentle to her mother, and nursed her, and did everything
for her; but the old woman accepted all her services without a word
and never showed her the slightest kindness. Marie bore all this; and
I could see when I got to know her that she thought it quite right and
fitting, considering herself the lowest and meanest of creatures.

"When the old woman took to her bed finally, the other old women in the
village sat with her by turns, as the custom is there; and then Marie
was quite driven out of the house. They gave her no food at all, and she
could not get any work in the village; none would employ her. The men
seemed to consider her no longer a woman, they said such dreadful things
to her. Sometimes on Sundays, if they were drunk enough, they used to
throw her a penny or two, into the mud, and Marie would silently pick up
the money. She had began to spit blood at that time.

"At last her rags became so tattered and torn that she was ashamed of
appearing in the village any longer. The children used to pelt her with
mud; so she begged to be taken on as assistant cowherd, but the cowherd
would not have her. Then she took to helping him without leave; and he
saw how valuable her assistance was to him, and did not drive her away
again; on the contrary, he occasionally gave her the remnants of his
dinner, bread and cheese. He considered that he was being very kind.
When the mother died, the village parson was not ashamed to hold Marie
up to public derision and shame. Marie was standing at the coffin's
head, in all her rags, crying.

"A crowd of people had collected to see how she would cry. The parson,
a young fellow ambitious of becoming a great preacher, began his sermon
and pointed to Marie. 'There,' he said, 'there is the cause of the death
of this venerable woman'--(which was a lie, because she had been ill for
at least two years)--'there she stands before you, and dares not lift
her eyes from the ground, because she knows that the finger of God is
upon her. Look at her tatters and rags--the badge of those who lose
their virtue. Who is she? her daughter!' and so on to the end.

"And just fancy, this infamy pleased them, all of them, nearly. Only the
children had altered--for then they were all on my side and had learned
to love Marie.

"This is how it was: I had wished to do something for Marie; I longed to
give her some money, but I never had a farthing while I was there. But
I had a little diamond pin, and this I sold to a travelling pedlar; he
gave me eight francs for it--it was worth at least forty.

"I long sought to meet Marie alone; and at last I did meet her, on the
hillside beyond the village. I gave her the eight francs and asked her
to take care of the money because I could get no more; and then I kissed
her and said that she was not to suppose I kissed her with any evil
motives or because I was in love with her, for that I did so solely out
of pity for her, and because from the first I had not accounted her as
guilty so much as unfortunate. I longed to console and encourage her
somehow, and to assure her that she was not the low, base thing which
she and others strove to make out; but I don't think she understood me.
She stood before me, dreadfully ashamed of herself, and with downcast
eyes; and when I had finished she kissed my hand. I would have kissed
hers, but she drew it away. Just at this moment the whole troop of
children saw us. (I found out afterwards that they had long kept a
watch upon me.) They all began whistling and clapping their hands, and
laughing at us. Marie ran away at once; and when I tried to talk to
them, they threw stones at me. All the village heard of it the same day,
and Marie's position became worse than ever. The children would not let
her pass now in the streets, but annoyed her and threw dirt at her more
than before. They used to run after her--she racing away with her poor
feeble lungs panting and gasping, and they pelting her and shouting
abuse at her.

"Once I had to interfere by force; and after that I took to speaking
to them every day and whenever I could. Occasionally they stopped and
listened; but they teased Marie all the same.

"I told them how unhappy Marie was, and after a while they stopped their
abuse of her, and let her go by silently. Little by little we got into
the way of conversing together, the children and I. I concealed nothing
from them, I told them all. They listened very attentively and soon
began to be sorry for Marie. At last some of them took to saying
'Good-morning' to her, kindly, when they met her. It is the custom there
to salute anyone you meet with 'Good-morning' whether acquainted or not.
I can imagine how astonished Marie was at these first greetings from the
children.

"Once two little girls got hold of some food and took it to her, and
came back and told me. They said she had burst into tears, and that they
loved her very much now. Very soon after that they all became fond of
Marie, and at the same time they began to develop the greatest affection
for myself. They often came to me and begged me to tell them stories. I
think I must have told stories well, for they did so love to hear them.
At last I took to reading up interesting things on purpose to pass them
on to the little ones, and this went on for all the rest of my time
there, three years. Later, when everyone--even Schneider--was angry with
me for hiding nothing from the children, I pointed out how foolish it
was, for they always knew things, only they learnt them in a way that
soiled their minds but not so from me. One has only to remember one's
