own childhood to admit the truth of this. But nobody was convinced... It
was two weeks before her mother died that I had kissed Marie; and when
the clergyman preached that sermon the children were all on my side.

"When I told them what a shame it was of the parson to talk as he had
done, and explained my reason, they were so angry that some of them went
and broke his windows with stones. Of course I stopped them, for that
was not right, but all the village heard of it, and how I caught it for
spoiling the children! Everyone discovered now that the little ones had
taken to being fond of Marie, and their parents were terribly alarmed;
but Marie was so happy. The children were forbidden to meet her; but
they used to run out of the village to the herd and take her food and
things; and sometimes just ran off there and kissed her, and said, 'Je
vous aime, Marie!' and then trotted back again. They imagined that I
was in love with Marie, and this was the only point on which I did not
undeceive them, for they got such enjoyment out of it. And what delicacy
and tenderness they showed!

"In the evening I used to walk to the waterfall. There was a spot there
which was quite closed in and hidden from view by large trees; and to
this spot the children used to come to me. They could not bear that
their dear Leon should love a poor girl without shoes to her feet and
dressed all in rags and tatters. So, would you believe it, they actually
clubbed together, somehow, and bought her shoes and stockings, and some
linen, and even a dress! I can't understand how they managed it, but
they did it, all together. When I asked them about it they only laughed
and shouted, and the little girls clapped their hands and kissed me. I
sometimes went to see Marie secretly, too. She had become very ill, and
could hardly walk. She still went with the herd, but could not help the
herdsman any longer. She used to sit on a stone near, and wait there
almost motionless all day, till the herd went home. Her consumption was
so advanced, and she was so weak, that she used to sit with closed eyes,
breathing heavily. Her face was as thin as a skeleton's, and sweat used
to stand on her white brow in large drops. I always found her sitting
just like that. I used to come up quietly to look at her; but Marie
would hear me, open her eyes, and tremble violently as she kissed my
hands. I did not take my hand away because it made her happy to have it,
and so she would sit and cry quietly. Sometimes she tried to speak; but
it was very difficult to understand her. She was almost like a madwoman,
with excitement and ecstasy, whenever I came. Occasionally the children
came with me; when they did so, they would stand some way off and keep
guard over us, so as to tell me if anybody came near. This was a great
pleasure to them.

"When we left her, Marie used to relapse at once into her old condition,
and sit with closed eyes and motionless limbs. One day she could not
go out at all, and remained at home all alone in the empty hut; but
the children very soon became aware of the fact, and nearly all of them
visited her that day as she lay alone and helpless in her miserable bed.

"For two days the children looked after her, and then, when the village
people got to know that Marie was really dying, some of the old women
came and took it in turns to sit by her and look after her a bit. I
think they began to be a little sorry for her in the village at last;
at all events they did not interfere with the children any more, on her
account.

"Marie lay in a state of uncomfortable delirium the whole while; she
coughed dreadfully. The old women would not let the children stay in the
room; but they all collected outside the window each morning, if only
for a moment, and shouted 'Bon jour, notre bonne Marie!' and Marie no
sooner caught sight of, or heard them, and she became quite animated at
once, and, in spite of the old women, would try to sit up and nod her
head and smile at them, and thank them. The little ones used to bring
her nice things and sweets to eat, but she could hardly touch anything.
Thanks to them, I assure you, the girl died almost perfectly happy. She
almost forgot her misery, and seemed to accept their love as a sort of
symbol of pardon for her offence, though she never ceased to consider
herself a dreadful sinner. They used to flutter at her window just like
little birds, calling out: 'Nous t'aimons, Marie!'

"She died very soon; I had thought she would live much longer. The
day before her death I went to see her for the last time, just before
sunset. I think she recognized me, for she pressed my hand.

"Next morning they came and told me that Marie was dead. The children
could not be restrained now; they went and covered her coffin with
flowers, and put a wreath of lovely blossoms on her head. The pastor did
not throw any more shameful words at the poor dead woman; but there were
very few people at the funeral. However, when it came to carrying the
coffin, all the children rushed up, to carry it themselves. Of course
they could not do it alone, but they insisted on helping, and walked
alongside and behind, crying.

"They have planted roses all round her grave, and every year they look
alter the flowers and make Marie's resting-place as beautiful as they
can. I was in ill odour after all this with the parents of the children,
and especially with the parson and schoolmaster. Schneider was obliged
to promise that I should not meet them and talk to them; but we
conversed from a distance by signs, and they used to write me sweet
little notes. Afterwards I came closer than ever to those little souls,
but even then it was very dear to me, to have them so fond of me.

"Schneider said that I did the children great harm by my pernicious
'system'; what nonsense that was! And what did he mean by my system?
He said afterwards that he believed I was a child myself--just before
I came away. 'You have the form and face of an adult' he said, 'but as
regards soul, and character, and perhaps even intelligence, you are a
child in the completest sense of the word, and always will be, if you
live to be sixty.' I laughed very much, for of course that is nonsense.
But it is a fact that I do not care to be among grown-up people and
much prefer the society of children. However kind people may be to me, I
never feel quite at home with them, and am always glad to get back to
my little companions. Now my companions have always been children, not
because I was a child myself once, but because young things attract
me. On one of the first days of my stay in Switzerland, I was strolling
about alone and miserable, when I came upon the children rushing noisily
out of school, with their slates and bags, and books, their games, their
laughter and shouts--and my soul went out to them. I stopped and laughed
happily as I watched their little feet moving so quickly. Girls and
boys, laughing and crying; for as they went home many of them found
time to fight and make peace, to weep and play. I forgot my troubles in
looking at them. And then, all those three years, I tried to understand
why men should be for ever tormenting themselves. I lived the life of
a child there, and thought I should never leave the little village;
indeed, I was far from thinking that I should ever return to Russia.
But at last I recognized the fact that Schneider could not keep me any
longer. And then something so important happened, that Schneider himself
urged me to depart. I am going to see now if can get good advice
about it. Perhaps my lot in life will be changed; but that is not the
principal thing. The principal thing is the entire change that has
already come over me. I left many things behind me--too many. They have
gone. On the journey I said to myself, 'I am going into the world of
men. I don't know much, perhaps, but a new life has begun for me.' I
made up my mind to be honest, and steadfast in accomplishing my task.
Perhaps I shall meet with troubles and many disappointments, but I have
made up my mind to be polite and sincere to everyone; more cannot be
asked of me. People may consider me a child if they like. I am often
called an idiot, and at one time I certainly was so ill that I was
nearly as bad as an idiot; but I am not an idiot now. How can I possibly
be so when I know myself that I am considered one?

"When I received a letter from those dear little souls, while passing
through Berlin, I only then realized how much I loved them. It was very,
very painful, getting that first little letter. How melancholy they had
been when they saw me off! For a month before, they had been talking of
my departure and sorrowing over it; and at the waterfall, of an evening,
when we parted for the night, they would hug me so tight and kiss me so
warmly, far more so than before. And every now and then they would turn
up one by one when I was alone, just to give me a kiss and a hug, to
show their love for me. The whole flock went with me to the station,
which was about a mile from the village, and every now and then one of
them would stop to throw his arms round me, and all the little girls had
tears in their voices, though they tried hard not to cry. As the train
steamed out of the station, I saw them all standing on the platform
waving to me and crying 'Hurrah!' till they were lost in the distance.

"I assure you, when I came in here just now and saw your kind faces (I
can read faces well) my heart felt light for the first time since that
moment of parting. I think I must be one of those who are born to be in
luck, for one does not often meet with people whom one feels he can love
from the first sight of their faces; and yet, no sooner do I step out of
the railway carriage than I happen upon you!

"I know it is more or less a shamefaced thing to speak of one's feelings
before others; and yet here am I talking like this to you, and am not
a bit ashamed or shy. I am an unsociable sort of fellow and shall very
likely not come to see you again for some time; but don't think the
worse of me for that. It is not that I do not value your society; and
you must never suppose that I have taken offence at anything.

"You asked me about your faces, and what I could read in them; I will
tell you with the greatest pleasure. You, Adelaida Ivanovna, have a very
happy face; it is the most sympathetic of the three. Not to speak of
your natural beauty, one can look at your face and say to one's self,
'She has the face of a kind sister.' You are simple and merry, but you
can see into another's heart very quickly. That's what I read in your
face.

"You too, Alexandra Ivanovna, have a very lovely face; but I think you
may have some secret sorrow. Your heart is undoubtedly a kind, good one,
but you are not merry. There is a certain suspicion of 'shadow' in your
face, like in that of Holbein's Madonna in Dresden. So much for your
face. Have I guessed right?

"As for your face, Lizabetha Prokofievna, I not only think, but am
perfectly SURE, that you are an absolute child--in all, in all, mind,
both good and bad-and in spite of your years. Don't be angry with me
for saying so; you know what my feelings for children are. And do not
suppose that I am so candid out of pure simplicity of soul. Oh dear no,
it is by no means the case! Perhaps I have my own very profound object
in view."

VII.

When the prince ceased speaking all were gazing merrily at him--even
Aglaya; but Lizabetha Prokofievna looked the jolliest of all.

"Well!" she cried, "we HAVE 'put him through his paces,' with a
vengeance! My dears, you imagined, I believe, that you were about
to patronize this young gentleman, like some poor protege picked up
somewhere, and taken under your magnificent protection. What fools we
were, and what a specially big fool is your father! Well done, prince! I
assure you the general actually asked me to put you through your paces,
and examine you. As to what you said about my face, you are absolutely
correct in your judgment. I am a child, and know it. I knew it long
before you said so; you have expressed my own thoughts. I think your
nature and mine must be extremely alike, and I am very glad of it. We
are like two drops of water, only you are a man and I a woman, and I've
not been to Switzerland, and that is all the difference between us."

"Don't be in a hurry, mother; the prince says that he has some motive
behind his simplicity," cried Aglaya.

"Yes, yes, so he does," laughed the others.

"Oh, don't you begin bantering him," said mamma. "He is probably a good
deal cleverer than all three of you girls put together. We shall see.
Only you haven't told us anything about Aglaya yet, prince; and Aglaya
and I are both waiting to hear."

"I cannot say anything at present. I'll tell you afterwards."

"Why? Her face is clear enough, isn't it?"

"Oh yes, of course. You are very beautiful, Aglaya Ivanovna, so
beautiful that one is afraid to look at you."

"Is that all? What about her character?" persisted Mrs. Epanchin.

"It is difficult to judge when such beauty is concerned. I have not
prepared my judgment. Beauty is a riddle."

"That means that you have set Aglaya a riddle!" said Adelaida. "Guess
it, Aglaya! But she's pretty, prince, isn't she?"

"Most wonderfully so," said the latter, warmly, gazing at Aglaya with
admiration. "Almost as lovely as Nastasia Philipovna, but quite a
different type."

All present exchanged looks of surprise.

"As lovely as WHO?" said Mrs. Epanchin. "As NASTASIA PHILIPOVNA? Where
have you seen Nastasia Philipovna? What Nastasia Philipovna?"

"Gavrila Ardalionovitch showed the general her portrait just now."

"How so? Did he bring the portrait for my husband?"

"Only to show it. Nastasia Philipovna gave it to Gavrila Ardalionovitch
today, and the latter brought it here to show to the general."

"I must see it!" cried Mrs. Epanchin. "Where is the portrait? If she
gave it to him, he must have it; and he is still in the study. He
never leaves before four o'clock on Wednesdays. Send for Gavrila
Ardalionovitch at once. No, I don't long to see HIM so much. Look here,
dear prince, BE so kind, will you? Just step to the study and fetch this
portrait! Say we want to look at it. Please do this for me, will you?"

"He is a nice fellow, but a little too simple," said Adelaida, as the
prince left the room.

"He is, indeed," said Alexandra; "almost laughably so at times."

Neither one nor the other seemed to give expression to her full
thoughts.

"He got out of it very neatly about our faces, though," said Aglaya. "He
flattered us all round, even mamma."

"Nonsense" cried the latter. "He did not flatter me. It was I who found
his appreciation flattering. I think you are a great deal more foolish
than he is. He is simple, of course, but also very knowing. Just like
myself."

"How stupid of me to speak of the portrait," thought the prince as
he entered the study, with a feeling of guilt at his heart, "and yet,
perhaps I was right after all." He had an idea, unformed as yet, but a
strange idea.

Gavrila Ardalionovitch was still sitting in the study, buried in a
mass of papers. He looked as though he did not take his salary from the
public company, whose servant he was, for a sinecure.

He grew very wroth and confused when the prince asked for the portrait,
and explained how it came about that he had spoken of it.

"Oh, curse it all," he said; "what on earth must you go blabbing for?
You know nothing about the thing, and yet--idiot!" he added, muttering
the last word to himself in irrepressible rage.

"I am very sorry; I was not thinking at the time. I merely said that
Aglaya was almost as beautiful as Nastasia Philipovna."

Gania asked for further details; and the prince once more repeated the
conversation. Gania looked at him with ironical contempt the while.

"Nastasia Philipovna," he began, and there paused; he was clearly much
agitated and annoyed. The prince reminded him of the portrait.

"Listen, prince," said Gania, as though an idea had just struck him, "I
wish to ask you a great favour, and yet I really don't know--"

He paused again, he was trying to make up his mind to something, and
was turning the matter over. The prince waited quietly. Once more Gania
fixed him with intent and questioning eyes.

"Prince," he began again, "they are rather angry with me, in there,
owing to a circumstance which I need not explain, so that I do not care
to go in at present without an invitation. I particularly wish to speak
to Aglaya, but I have written a few words in case I shall not have the
chance of seeing her" (here the prince observed a small note in his
hand), "and I do not know how to get my communication to her. Don't you
think you could undertake to give it to her at once, but only to her,
mind, and so that no one else should see you give it? It isn't much of a
secret, but still--Well, will you do it?"

"I don't quite like it," replied the prince.

"Oh, but it is absolutely necessary for me," Gania entreated. "Believe
me, if it were not so, I would not ask you; how else am I to get it to
her? It is most important, dreadfully important!"

Gania was evidently much alarmed at the idea that the prince would not
consent to take his note, and he looked at him now with an expression of
absolute entreaty.

"Well, I will take it then."

"But mind, nobody is to see!" cried the delighted Gania "And of course I
may rely on your word of honour, eh?"

"I won't show it to anyone," said the prince.

"The letter is not sealed--" continued Gania, and paused in confusion.

"Oh, I won't read it," said the prince, quite simply.

He took up the portrait, and went out of the room.

Gania, left alone, clutched his head with his hands.

"One word from her," he said, "one word from her, and I may yet be
free."

He could not settle himself to his papers again, for agitation and
excitement, but began walking up and down the room from corner to
corner.

The prince walked along, musing. He did not like his commission, and
disliked the idea of Gania sending a note to Aglaya at all; but when
he was two rooms distant from the drawing-room, where they all were,
he stopped a though recalling something; went to the window, nearer the
light, and began to examine the portrait in his hand.

He longed to solve the mystery of something in the face Nastasia
Philipovna, something which had struck him as he looked at the portrait
for the first time; the impression had not left him. It was partly the
fact of her marvellous beauty that struck him, and partly something
else. There was a suggestion of immense pride and disdain in the face
almost of hatred, and at the same time something confiding and very full
of simplicity. The contrast aroused a deep sympathy in his heart as
he looked at the lovely face. The blinding loveliness of it was almost
intolerable, this pale thin face with its flaming eyes; it was a strange
beauty.

The prince gazed at it for a minute or two, then glanced around him,
and hurriedly raised the portrait to his lips. When, a minute after, he
reached the drawing-room door, his face was quite composed. But just as
he reached the door he met Aglaya coming out alone.

"Gavrila Ardalionovitch begged me to give you this," he said, handing
her the note.

Aglaya stopped, took the letter, and gazed strangely into the prince's
eyes. There was no confusion in her face; a little surprise, perhaps,
but that was all. By her look she seemed merely to challenge the prince
to an explanation as to how he and Gania happened to be connected in
this matter. But her expression was perfectly cool and quiet, and even
condescending.

So they stood for a moment or two, confronting one another. At length a
faint smile passed over her face, and she passed by him without a word.

Mrs. Epanchin examined the portrait of Nastasia Philipovna for some
little while, holding it critically at arm's length.

"Yes, she is pretty," she said at last, "even very pretty. I have seen
her twice, but only at a distance. So you admire this kind of beauty, do
you?" she asked the prince, suddenly.

"Yes, I do--this kind."

"Do you mean especially this kind?"

"Yes, especially this kind."

"Why?"

"There is much suffering in this face," murmured the prince, more as
though talking to himself than answering the question.

"I think you are wandering a little, prince," Mrs. Epanchin decided,
after a lengthened survey of his face; and she tossed the portrait on to
the table, haughtily.

Alexandra took it, and Adelaida came up, and both the girls examined the
photograph. Just then Aglaya entered the room.

"What a power!" cried Adelaida suddenly, as she earnestly examined the
portrait over her sister's shoulder.

"Whom? What power?" asked her mother, crossly.

"Such beauty is real power," said Adelaida. "With such beauty as that
one might overthrow the world." She returned to her easel thoughtfully.

Aglaya merely glanced at the portrait--frowned, and put out her
underlip; then went and sat down on the sofa with folded hands. Mrs.
Epanchin rang the bell.

"Ask Gavrila Ardalionovitch to step this way," said she to the man who
answered.

"Mamma!" cried Alexandra, significantly.

"I shall just say two words to him, that's all," said her mother,
silencing all objection by her manner; she was evidently seriously put
out. "You see, prince, it is all secrets with us, just now--all secrets.
It seems to be the etiquette of the house, for some reason or, other.
Stupid nonsense, and in a matter which ought to be approached with all
candour and open-heartedness. There is a marriage being talked of, and I
don't like this marriage--"

"Mamma, what are you saying?" said Alexandra again, hurriedly.

"Well, what, my dear girl? As if you can possibly like it yourself? The
heart is the great thing, and the rest is all rubbish--though one must
have sense as well. Perhaps sense is really the great thing. Don't smile
like that, Aglaya. I don't contradict myself. A fool with a heart and no
brains is just as unhappy as a fool with brains and no heart. I am one
and you are the other, and therefore both of us suffer, both of us are
unhappy."

"Why are you so unhappy, mother?" asked Adelaida, who alone of all the
company seemed to have preserved her good temper and spirits up to now.

"In the first place, because of my carefully brought-up daughters," said
Mrs. Epanchin, cuttingly; "and as that is the best reason I can give you
we need not bother about any other at present. Enough of words, now!
We shall see how both of you (I don't count Aglaya) will manage your
business, and whether you, most revered Alexandra Ivanovna, will be
happy with your fine mate."

"Ah!" she added, as Gania suddenly entered the room, "here's another
marrying subject. How do you do?" she continued, in response to Gania's
bow; but she did not invite him to sit down. "You are going to be
married?"

"Married? how--what marriage?" murmured Gania, overwhelmed with
confusion.

"Are you about to take a wife? I ask,--if you prefer that expression."

"No, no I-I--no!" said Gania, bringing out his lie with a tell-tale
blush of shame. He glanced keenly at Aglaya, who was sitting some way
off, and dropped his eyes immediately.

Aglaya gazed coldly, intently, and composedly at him, without taking her
eyes off his face, and watched his confusion.

"No? You say no, do you?" continued the pitiless Mrs. General. "Very
well, I shall remember that you told me this Wednesday morning, in
answer to my question, that you are not going to be married. What day is
it, Wednesday, isn't it?"

"Yes, I think so!" said Adelaida.

"You never know the day of the week; what's the day of the month?"

"Twenty-seventh!" said Gania.

"Twenty-seventh; very well. Good-bye now; you have a good deal to do,
I'm sure, and I must dress and go out. Take your portrait. Give my
respects to your unfortunate mother, Nina Alexandrovna. Au revoir, dear
prince, come in and see us often, do; and I shall tell old Princess
Bielokonski about you. I shall go and see her on purpose. And listen,
my dear boy, I feel sure that God has sent you to Petersburg from
Switzerland on purpose for me. Maybe you will have other things to do,
besides, but you are sent chiefly for my sake, I feel sure of it. God
sent you to me! Au revoir! Alexandra, come with me, my dear."

Mrs. Epanchin left the room.

Gania--confused, annoyed, furious--took up his portrait, and turned to
the prince with a nasty smile on his face.

"Prince," he said, "I am just going home. If you have not changed your
mind as to living with us, perhaps you would like to come with me. You
don't know the address, I believe?"

"Wait a minute, prince," said Aglaya, suddenly rising from her seat, "do
write something in my album first, will you? Father says you are a most
talented caligraphist; I'll bring you my book in a minute." She left the
room.

"Well, au revoir, prince," said Adelaida, "I must be going too." She
pressed the prince's hand warmly, and gave him a friendly smile as she
left the room. She did not so much as look at Gania.

"This is your doing, prince," said Gania, turning on the latter so soon
as the others were all out of the room. "This is your doing, sir! YOU
have been telling them that I am going to be married!" He said this in
a hurried whisper, his eyes flashing with rage and his face ablaze. "You
shameless tattler!"

"I assure you, you are under a delusion," said the prince, calmly and
politely. "I did not even know that you were to be married."

"You heard me talking about it, the general and me. You heard me say
that everything was to be settled today at Nastasia Philipovna's, and
you went and blurted it out here. You lie if you deny it. Who else
could have told them Devil take it, sir, who could have told them except
yourself? Didn't the old woman as good as hint as much to me?"

"If she hinted to you who told her you must know best, of course; but I
never said a word about it."

"Did you give my note? Is there an answer?" interrupted Gania,
impatiently.

But at this moment Aglaya came back, and the prince had no time to
reply.

"There, prince," said she, "there's my album. Now choose a page and
write me something, will you? There's a pen, a new one; do you mind a
steel one? I have heard that you caligraphists don't like steel pens."

Conversing with the prince, Aglaya did not even seem to notice that
Gania was in the room. But while the prince was getting his pen ready,
finding a page, and making his preparations to write, Gania came up to
the fireplace where Aglaya was standing, to the right of the prince, and
in trembling, broken accents said, almost in her ear:

"One word, just one word from you, and I'm saved."

The prince turned sharply round and looked at both of them. Gania's
face was full of real despair; he seemed to have said the words almost
unconsciously and on the impulse of the moment.

Aglaya gazed at him for some seconds with precisely the same composure
and calm astonishment as she had shown a little while before, when the
prince handed her the note, and it appeared that this calm surprise and
seemingly absolute incomprehension of what was said to her, were more
terribly overwhelming to Gania than even the most plainly expressed
disdain would have been.

"What shall I write?" asked the prince.

"I'll dictate to you," said Aglaya, coming up to the table. "Now then,
are you ready? Write, 'I never condescend to bargain!' Now put your name
and the date. Let me see it."

The prince handed her the album.

"Capital! How beautifully you have written it! Thanks so much. Au
revoir, prince. Wait a minute,"; she added, "I want to give you
something for a keepsake. Come with me this way, will you?"

The prince followed her. Arrived at the dining-room, she stopped.

"Read this," she said, handing him Gania's note.

The prince took it from her hand, but gazed at her in bewilderment.

"Oh! I KNOW you haven't read it, and that you could never be that man's
accomplice. Read it, I wish you to read it."

The letter had evidently been written in a hurry:

"My fate is to be decided today" (it ran), "you know how. This day I
must give my word irrevocably. I have no right to ask your help, and I
dare not allow myself to indulge in any hopes; but once you said just
one word, and that word lighted up the night of my life, and became the
beacon of my days. Say one more such word, and save me from utter ruin.
Only tell me, 'break off the whole thing!' and I will do so this very
day. Oh! what can it cost you to say just this one word? In doing so you
will but be giving me a sign of your sympathy for me, and of your pity;
only this, only this; nothing more, NOTHING. I dare not indulge in any
hope, because I am unworthy of it. But if you say but this word, I will
take up my cross again with joy, and return once more to my battle with
poverty. I shall meet the storm and be glad of it; I shall rise up with
renewed strength.

"Send me back then this one word of sympathy, only sympathy, I swear
to you; and oh! do not be angry with the audacity of despair, with the
drowning man who has dared to make this last effort to save himself from
perishing beneath the waters.

"G.L."

"This man assures me," said Aglaya, scornfully, when the prince had
finished reading the letter, "that the words 'break off everything'
do not commit me to anything whatever; and himself gives me a written
guarantee to that effect, in this letter. Observe how ingenuously he
underlines certain words, and how crudely he glosses over his hidden
thoughts. He must know that if he 'broke off everything,' FIRST, by
himself, and without telling me a word about it or having the slightest
hope on my account, that in that case I should perhaps be able to change
my opinion of him, and even accept his--friendship. He must know that,
but his soul is such a wretched thing. He knows it and cannot make
up his mind; he knows it and yet asks for guarantees. He cannot bring
himself to TRUST, he wants me to give him hopes of myself before he lets
go of his hundred thousand roubles. As to the 'former word' which he
declares 'lighted up the night of his life,' he is simply an impudent
liar; I merely pitied him once. But he is audacious and shameless. He
immediately began to hope, at that very moment. I saw it. He has tried
to catch me ever since; he is still fishing for me. Well, enough of
this. Take the letter and give it back to him, as soon as you have left
our house; not before, of course."

"And what shall I tell him by way of answer?"

"Nothing--of course! That's the best answer. Is it the case that you are
going to live in his house?"

"Yes, your father kindly recommended me to him."

"Then look out for him, I warn you! He won't forgive you easily, for
taking back the letter."

Aglaya pressed the prince's hand and left the room. Her face was serious
and frowning; she did not even smile as she nodded good-bye to him at
the door.

"I'll just get my parcel and we'll go," said the prince to Gania, as he
re-entered the drawing-room. Gania stamped his foot with impatience. His
face looked dark and gloomy with rage.

At last they left the house behind them, the prince carrying his bundle.

"The answer--quick--the answer!" said Gania, the instant they were
outside. "What did she say? Did you give the letter?" The prince
silently held out the note. Gania was struck motionless with amazement.

"How, what? my letter?" he cried. "He never delivered it! I might have
guessed it, oh! curse him! Of course she did not understand what I
meant, naturally! Why-why-WHY didn't you give her the note, you--"

"Excuse me; I was able to deliver it almost immediately after receiving
your commission, and I gave it, too, just as you asked me to. It has
come into my hands now because Aglaya Ivanovna has just returned it to
me."

"How? When?"

"As soon as I finished writing in her album for her, and when she asked
me to come out of the room with her (you heard?), we went into the
dining-room, and she gave me your letter to read, and then told me to
return it."

"To READ?" cried Gania, almost at the top of his voice; "to READ, and
you read it?"

And again he stood like a log in the middle of the pavement; so amazed
that his mouth remained open after the last word had left it.

"Yes, I have just read it."

"And she gave it you to read herself--HERSELF?"

"Yes, herself; and you may believe me when I tell you that I would not
have read it for anything without her permission."

Gania was silent for a minute or two, as though thinking out some
problem. Suddenly he cried:

"It's impossible, she cannot have given it to you to read! You are
lying. You read it yourself!"

"I am telling you the truth," said the prince in his former composed
tone of voice; "and believe me, I am extremely sorry that the
circumstance should have made such an unpleasant impression upon you!"

"But, you wretched man, at least she must have said something? There
must be SOME answer from her!"

"Yes, of course, she did say something!"

"Out with it then, damn it! Out with it at once!" and Gania stamped his
foot twice on the pavement.

"As soon as I had finished reading it, she told me that you were fishing
for her; that you wished to compromise her so far as to receive some
hopes from her, trusting to which hopes you might break with the
prospect of receiving a hundred thousand roubles. She said that if you
had done this without bargaining with her, if you had broken with the
money prospects without trying to force a guarantee out of her first,
she might have been your friend. That's all, I think. Oh no, when I
asked her what I was to say, as I took the letter, she replied that 'no
answer is the best answer.' I think that was it. Forgive me if I do
not use her exact expressions. I tell you the sense as I understood it
myself."

Ungovernable rage and madness took entire possession of Gania, and his
fury burst out without the least attempt at restraint.

"Oh! that's it, is it!" he yelled. "She throws my letters out of the
window, does she! Oh! and she does not condescend to bargain, while I
DO, eh? We shall see, we shall see! I shall pay her out for this."

He twisted himself about with rage, and grew paler and paler; he shook
his fist. So the pair walked along a few steps. Gania did not stand on
ceremony with the prince; he behaved just as though he were alone in
his room. He clearly counted the latter as a nonentity. But suddenly he
seemed to have an idea, and recollected himself.

"But how was it?" he asked, "how was it that you (idiot that you are),"
he added to himself, "were so very confidential a couple of hours after
your first meeting with these people? How was that, eh?"

Up to this moment jealousy had not been one of his torments; now it
suddenly gnawed at his heart.

"That is a thing I cannot undertake to explain," replied the prince.
Gania looked at him with angry contempt.

"Oh! I suppose the present she wished to make to you, when she took you
into the dining-room, was her confidence, eh?"

"I suppose that was it; I cannot explain it otherwise?"

"But why, WHY? Devil take it, what did you do in there? Why did they
fancy you? Look here, can't you remember exactly what you said to them,
from the very beginning? Can't you remember?"

"Oh, we talked of a great many things. When first I went in we began to
speak of Switzerland."

"Oh, the devil take Switzerland!"

"Then about executions."

"Executions?"

"Yes--at least about one. Then I told the whole three years' story of my
life, and the history of a poor peasant girl--"

"Oh, damn the peasant girl! go on, go on!" said Gania, impatiently.

"Then how Schneider told me about my childish nature, and--"

"Oh, CURSE Schneider and his dirty opinions! Go on."

"Then I began to talk about faces, at least about the EXPRESSIONS of
faces, and said that Aglaya Ivanovna was nearly as lovely as Nastasia
Philipovna. It was then I blurted out about the portrait--"

"But you didn't repeat what you heard in the study? You didn't repeat
that--eh?"

"No, I tell you I did NOT."

"Then how did they--look here! Did Aglaya show my letter to the old
lady?"

"Oh, there I can give you my fullest assurance that she did NOT. I was
there all the while--she had no time to do it!"

"But perhaps you may not have observed it, oh, you damned idiot, you!"
he shouted, quite beside himself with fury. "You can't even describe
what went on."

Gania having once descended to abuse, and receiving no check, very soon
knew no bounds or limit to his licence, as is often the way in such
cases. His rage so blinded him that he had not even been able to detect
that this "idiot," whom he was abusing to such an extent, was very
far from being slow of comprehension, and had a way of taking in
an impression, and afterwards giving it out again, which was very
un-idiotic indeed. But something a little unforeseen now occurred.

"I think I ought to tell you, Gavrila Ardalionovitch," said the prince,
suddenly, "that though I once was so ill that I really was little better
than an idiot, yet now I am almost recovered, and that, therefore, it is
not altogether pleasant to be called an idiot to my face. Of course your
anger is excusable, considering the treatment you have just experienced;
but I must remind you that you have twice abused me rather rudely. I
do not like this sort of thing, and especially so at the first time
of meeting a man, and, therefore, as we happen to be at this moment
standing at a crossroad, don't you think we had better part, you to the
left, homewards, and I to the right, here? I have twenty-five roubles,
and I shall easily find a lodging."

Gania was much confused, and blushed for shame "Do forgive me, prince!"
he cried, suddenly changing his abusive tone for one of great courtesy.
"For Heaven's sake, forgive me! You see what a miserable plight I am
in, but you hardly know anything of the facts of the case as yet. If you
did, I am sure you would forgive me, at least partially. Of course it
was inexcusable of me, I know, but--"

"Oh, dear me, I really do not require such profuse apologies," replied
the prince, hastily. "I quite understand how unpleasant your position
is, and that is what made you abuse me. So come along to your house,
after all. I shall be delighted--"

"I am not going to let him go like this," thought Gania, glancing
angrily at the prince as they walked along. "The fellow has sucked
everything out of me, and now he takes off his mask--there's something
more than appears, here we shall see. It shall all be as clear as water
by tonight, everything!"

But by this time they had reached Gania's house.

VIII.

The flat occupied by Gania and his family was on the third floor of the
house. It was reached by a clean light staircase, and consisted of seven
rooms, a nice enough lodging, and one would have thought a little too
good for a clerk on two thousand roubles a year. But it was designed
to accommodate a few lodgers on board terms, and had been taken a few
months since, much to the disgust of Gania, at the urgent request of his
mother and his sister, Varvara Ardalionovna, who longed to do something
to increase the family income a little, and fixed their hopes upon
letting lodgings. Gania frowned upon the idea. He thought it infra dig,
and did not quite like appearing in society afterwards--that society in
which he had been accustomed to pose up to now as a young man of rather
brilliant prospects. All these concessions and rebuffs of fortune,
of late, had wounded his spirit severely, and his temper had become
extremely irritable, his wrath being generally quite out of proportion
to the cause. But if he had made up his mind to put up with this sort of
life for a while, it was only on the plain understanding with his inner
self that he would very soon change it all, and have things as he
chose again. Yet the very means by which he hoped to make this change
threatened to involve him in even greater difficulties than he had had
before.

The flat was divided by a passage which led straight out of the
entrance-hall. Along one side of this corridor lay the three rooms which
were designed for the accommodation of the "highly recommended" lodgers.
Besides these three rooms there was another small one at the end of the
passage, close to the kitchen, which was allotted to General Ivolgin,
the nominal master of the house, who slept on a wide sofa, and was
obliged to pass into and out of his room through the kitchen, and up
or down the back stairs. Colia, Gania's young brother, a school-boy of
thirteen, shared this room with his father. He, too, had to sleep on
an old sofa, a narrow, uncomfortable thing with a torn rug over it; his
chief duty being to look after his father, who needed to be watched more
and more every day.

The prince was given the middle room of the three, the first being
occupied by one Ferdishenko, while the third was empty.

But Gania first conducted the prince to the family apartments. These
consisted of a "salon," which became the dining-room when required; a
drawing-room, which was only a drawing-room in the morning, and became
Gania's study in the evening, and his bedroom at night; and lastly Nina
Alexandrovna's and Varvara's bedroom, a small, close chamber which they
shared together.

In a word, the whole place was confined, and a "tight fit" for the
party. Gania used to grind his teeth with rage over the state of
affairs; though he was anxious to be dutiful and polite to his mother.
However, it was very soon apparent to anyone coming into the house, that
Gania was the tyrant of the family.

Nina Alexandrovna and her daughter were both seated in the drawing-room,
engaged in knitting, and talking to a visitor, Ivan Petrovitch Ptitsin.

The lady of the house appeared to be a woman of about fifty years of
age, thin-faced, and with black lines under the eyes. She looked ill and
rather sad; but her face was a pleasant one for all that; and from the
first word that fell from her lips, any stranger would at once conclude
that she was of a serious and particularly sincere nature. In spite of
her sorrowful expression, she gave the idea of possessing considerable
firmness and decision.

Her dress was modest and simple to a degree, dark and elderly in style;
but both her face and appearance gave evidence that she had seen better
days.

Varvara was a girl of some twenty-three summers, of middle height, thin,
but possessing a face which, without being actually beautiful, had
the rare quality of charm, and might fascinate even to the extent of
passionate regard.

She was very like her mother: she even dressed like her, which proved
that she had no taste for smart clothes. The expression of her grey eyes
was merry and gentle, when it was not, as lately, too full of thought
and anxiety. The same decision and firmness was to be observed in her
face as in her mother's, but her strength seemed to be more vigorous
than that of Nina Alexandrovna. She was subject to outbursts of temper,
of which even her brother was a little afraid.

The present visitor, Ptitsin, was also afraid of her. This was a young
fellow of something under thirty, dressed plainly, but neatly. His
manners were good, but rather ponderously so. His dark beard bore
evidence to the fact that he was not in any government employ. He could
speak well, but preferred silence. On the whole he made a decidedly
agreeable impression. He was clearly attracted by Varvara, and made no
secret of his feelings. She trusted him in a friendly way, but had not
shown him any decided encouragement as yet, which fact did not quell his
ardour in the least.

Nina Alexandrovna was very fond of him, and had grown quite confidential
with him of late. Ptitsin, as was well known, was engaged in the
business of lending out money on good security, and at a good rate of
interest. He was a great friend of Gania's.

After a formal introduction by Gania (who greeted his mother very
shortly, took no notice of his sister, and immediately marched Ptitsin
out of the room), Nina Alexandrovna addressed a few kind words to the
prince and forthwith requested Colia, who had just appeared at the door,
to show him to the "middle room."

Colia was a nice-looking boy. His expression was simple and confiding,
and his manners were very polite and engaging.

"Where's your luggage?" he asked, as he led the prince away to his room.

"I had a bundle; it's in the entrance hall."

"I'll bring it you directly. We only have a cook and one maid, so I have
to help as much as I can. Varia looks after things, generally, and
loses her temper over it. Gania says you have only just arrived from
Switzerland?"

"Yes."

"Is it jolly there?"

"Very."

"Mountains?"

"Yes."

"I'll go and get your bundle."

Here Varvara joined them.

"The maid shall bring your bed-linen directly. Have you a portmanteau?"

"No; a bundle--your brother has just gone to the hall for it."

"There's nothing there except this," said Colia, returning at this
moment. "Where did you put it?"

"Oh! but that's all I have," said the prince, taking it.

"Ah! I thought perhaps Ferdishenko had taken it."

"Don't talk nonsense," said Varia, severely. She seemed put out, and was
only just polite with the prince.

"Oho!" laughed the boy, "you can be nicer than that to ME, you know--I'm
not Ptitsin!"

"You ought to be whipped, Colia, you silly boy. If you want anything"
(to the prince) "please apply to the servant. We dine at half-past four.
You can take your dinner with us, or have it in your room, just as you
please. Come along, Colia, don't disturb the prince."

At the door they met Gania coming in.

"Is father in?" he asked. Colia whispered something in his ear and went
out.

"Just a couple of words, prince, if you'll excuse me. Don't blab over
THERE about what you may see here, or in this house as to all that about
Aglaya and me, you know. Things are not altogether pleasant in this
establishment--devil take it all! You'll see. At all events keep your
tongue to yourself for TODAY."

"I assure you I 'blabbed' a great deal less than you seem to suppose,"
said the prince, with some annoyance. Clearly the relations between
Gania and himself were by no means improving.

"Oh I well; I caught it quite hot enough today, thanks to you. However,
I forgive you."

"I think you might fairly remember that I was not in any way bound, I
had no reason to be silent about that portrait. You never asked me not
to mention it."

"Pfu! what a wretched room this is--dark, and the window looking
into the yard. Your coming to our house is, in no respect, opportune.
However, it's not MY affair. I don't keep the lodgings."

Ptitsin here looked in and beckoned to Gania, who hastily left the room,
in spite of the fact that he had evidently wished to say something more
and had only made the remark about the room to gain time. The prince had
hardly had time to wash and tidy himself a little when the door opened
once more, and another figure appeared.

This was a gentleman of about thirty, tall, broadshouldered, and
red-haired; his face was red, too, and he possessed a pair of thick
lips, a wide nose, small eyes, rather bloodshot, and with an ironical
expression in them; as though he were perpetually winking at someone.
His whole appearance gave one the idea of impudence; his dress was
shabby.

He opened the door just enough to let his head in. His head remained so
placed for a few seconds while he quietly scrutinized the room; the door
then opened enough to admit his body; but still he did not enter. He
stood on the threshold and examined the prince carefully. At last he
gave the door a final shove, entered, approached the prince, took his
hand and seated himself and the owner of the room on two chairs side by
side.

"Ferdishenko," he said, gazing intently and inquiringly into the
prince's eyes.

"Very well, what next?" said the latter, almost laughing in his face.

"A lodger here," continued the other, staring as before.

"Do you wish to make acquaintance?" asked the prince.

"Ah!" said the visitor, passing his fingers through his hair and
sighing. He then looked over to the other side of the room and around
it. "Got any money?" he asked, suddenly.

"Not much."

"How much?"

"Twenty-five roubles."

"Let's see it."

The prince took his banknote out and showed it to Ferdishenko. The
latter unfolded it and looked at it; then he turned it round and
examined the other side; then he held it up to the light.

"How strange that it should have browned so," he said, reflectively.
"These twenty-five rouble notes brown in a most extraordinary way, while
other notes often grow paler. Take it."

The prince took his note. Ferdishenko rose.

"I came here to warn you," he said. "In the first place, don't lend me
any money, for I shall certainly ask you to."

"Very well."

"Shall you pay here?"

"Yes, I intend to."

"Oh! I DON'T intend to. Thanks. I live here, next door to you; you
noticed a room, did you? Don't come to me very often; I shall see you
here quite often enough. Have you seen the general?"

"No."

"Nor heard him?"

"No; of course not."

"Well, you'll both hear and see him soon; he even tries to borrow money
from me. Avis au lecteur. Good-bye; do you think a man can possibly live
with a name like Ferdishenko?"

"Why not?"

"Good-bye."

And so he departed. The prince found out afterwards that this gentleman
made it his business to amaze people with his originality and wit, but
that it did not as a rule "come off." He even produced a bad impression
on some people, which grieved him sorely; but he did not change his ways
for all that.

As he went out of the prince's room, he collided with yet another
visitor coming in. Ferdishenko took the opportunity of making several
warning gestures to the prince from behind the new arrival's back, and
left the room in conscious pride.

This next arrival was a tall red-faced man of about fifty-five, with
greyish hair and whiskers, and large eyes which stood out of their
sockets. His appearance would have been distinguished had it not been
that he gave the idea of being rather dirty. He was dressed in an old
coat, and he smelled of vodka when he came near. His walk was effective,
and he clearly did his best to appear dignified, and to impress people
by his manner.

This gentleman now approached the prince slowly, and with a most
courteous smile; silently took his hand and held it in his own, as he
examined the prince's features as though searching for familiar traits
therein.

"'Tis he, 'tis he!" he said at last, quietly, but with much solemnity.
"As though he were alive once more. I heard the familiar name-the
dear familiar name--and, oh. I how it reminded me of the irrevocable
past--Prince Muishkin, I believe?"

"Exactly so."

"General Ivolgin--retired and unfortunate. May I ask your Christian and
generic names?"

"Lef Nicolaievitch."

"So, so--the son of my old, I may say my childhood's friend, Nicolai
Petrovitch."

"My father's name was Nicolai Lvovitch."

"Lvovitch," repeated the general without the slightest haste, and with
perfect confidence, just as though he had not committed himself the
least in the world, but merely made a little slip of the tongue. He sat
down, and taking the prince's hand, drew him to a seat next to himself.

"I carried you in my arms as a baby," he observed.

"Really?" asked the prince. "Why, it's twenty years since my father
died."

"Yes, yes--twenty years and three months. We were educated together; I
went straight into the army, and he--"

"My father went into the army, too. He was a sub-lieutenant in the
Vasiliefsky regiment."

"No, sir--in the Bielomirsky; he changed into the latter shortly before
his death. I was at his bedside when he died, and gave him my blessing
for eternity. Your mother--" The general paused, as though overcome with
emotion.

"She died a few months later, from a cold," said the prince.

"Oh, not cold--believe an old man--not from a cold, but from grief for
her prince. Oh--your mother, your mother! heigh-ho! Youth--youth! Your
father and I--old friends as we were--nearly murdered each other for her
sake."

The prince began to be a little incredulous.

"I was passionately in love with her when she was engaged--engaged to my
friend. The prince noticed the fact and was furious. He came and woke me
at seven o'clock one morning. I rise and dress in amazement; silence on
both sides. I understand it all. He takes a couple of pistols out of his
pocket--across a handkerchief--without witnesses. Why invite witnesses
when both of us would be walking in eternity in a couple of minutes? The
pistols are loaded; we stretch the handkerchief and stand opposite one
another. We aim the pistols at each other's hearts. Suddenly tears start
to our eyes, our hands shake; we weep, we embrace--the battle is one of
self-sacrifice now! The prince shouts, 'She is yours;' I cry, 'She is
yours--' in a word, in a word--You've come to live with us, hey?"

"Yes--yes--for a while, I think," stammered the prince.

"Prince, mother begs you to come to her," said Colia, appearing at the
door.

The prince rose to go, but the general once more laid his hand in a
friendly manner on his shoulder, and dragged him down on to the sofa.

"As the true friend of your father, I wish to say a few words to you,"
he began. "I have suffered--there was a catastrophe. I suffered without
a trial; I had no trial. Nina Alexandrovna my wife, is an excellent
woman, so is my daughter Varvara. We have to let lodgings because we are
poor--a dreadful, unheard-of come-down for us--for me, who should
have been a governor-general; but we are very glad to have YOU, at all
events. Meanwhile there is a tragedy in the house."

The prince looked inquiringly at the other.

"Yes, a marriage is being arranged--a marriage between a questionable
woman and a young fellow who might be a flunkey. They wish to bring this
woman into the house where my wife and daughter reside, but while I
live and breathe she shall never enter my doors. I shall lie at the
threshold, and she shall trample me underfoot if she does. I hardly
talk to Gania now, and avoid him as much as I can. I warn you of this
beforehand, but you cannot fail to observe it. But you are the son of my
old friend, and I hope--"

"Prince, be so kind as to come to me for a moment in the drawing-room,"
said Nina Alexandrovna herself, appearing at the door.

"Imagine, my dear," cried the general, "it turns out that I have nursed
the prince on my knee in the old days." His wife looked searchingly at
him, and glanced at the prince, but said nothing. The prince rose and
followed her; but hardly had they reached the drawing-room, and Nina
Alexandrovna had begun to talk hurriedly, when in came the general.
She immediately relapsed into silence. The master of the house may have
observed this, but at all events he did not take any notice of it; he
was in high good humour.

"A son of my old friend, dear," he cried; "surely you must remember
Prince Nicolai Lvovitch? You saw him at--at Tver."

"I don't remember any Nicolai Lvovitch, Was that your father?" she
inquired of the prince.

"Yes, but he died at Elizabethgrad, not at Tver," said the prince,
rather timidly. "So Pavlicheff told me."

"No, Tver," insisted the general; "he removed just before his death. You
were very small and cannot remember; and Pavlicheff, though an excellent
fellow, may have made a mistake."

"You knew Pavlicheff then?"

"Oh, yes--a wonderful fellow; but I was present myself. I gave him my
blessing."

"My father was just about to be tried when he died," said the prince,
"although I never knew of what he was accused. He died in hospital."

"Oh! it was the Kolpakoff business, and of course he would have been
acquitted."

"Yes? Do you know that for a fact?" asked the prince, whose curiosity
was aroused by the general's words.

"I should think so indeed!" cried the latter. "The court-martial came to
no decision. It was a mysterious, an impossible business, one might say!
Captain Larionoff, commander of the company, had died; his command
was handed over to the prince for the moment. Very well. This soldier,
Kolpakoff, stole some leather from one of his comrades, intending to
sell it, and spent the money on drink. Well! The prince--you understand
that what follows took place in the presence of the sergeant-major, and
a corporal--the prince rated Kolpakoff soundly, and threatened to have
him flogged. Well, Kolpakoff went back to the barracks, lay down on
a camp bedstead, and in a quarter of an hour was dead: you quite
understand? It was, as I said, a strange, almost impossible, affair.
In due course Kolpakoff was buried; the prince wrote his report, the
deceased's name was removed from the roll. All as it should be, is it
not? But exactly three months later at the inspection of the brigade,
the man Kolpakoff was found in the third company of the second battalion
of infantry, Novozemlianski division, just as if nothing had happened!"

"What?" said the prince, much astonished.

"It did not occur--it's a mistake!" said Nina Alexandrovna quickly,
looking, at the prince rather anxiously. "Mon mari se trompe," she
added, speaking in French.

"My dear, 'se trompe' is easily said. Do you remember any case at all
like it? Everybody was at their wits' end. I should be the first to say
'qu'on se trompe,' but unfortunately I was an eye-witness, and was also
on the commission of inquiry. Everything proved that it was really he,
the very same soldier Kolpakoff who had been given the usual military
funeral to the sound of the drum. It is of course a most curious
case--nearly an impossible one. I recognize that... but--"

"Father, your dinner is ready," said Varvara at this point, putting her
head in at the door.

"Very glad, I'm particularly hungry. Yes, yes, a strange
coincidence--almost a psychological--"

"Your soup'll be cold; do come."

"Coming, coming," said the general. "Son of my old friend--" he was
heard muttering as he went down the passage.

"You will have to excuse very much in my husband, if you stay with us,"
said Nina Alexandrovna; "but he will not disturb you often. He dines
alone. Everyone has his little peculiarities, you know, and some people
perhaps have more than those who are most pointed at and laughed at.
One thing I must beg of you-if my husband applies to you for payment
for board and lodging, tell him that you have already paid me. Of course
anything paid by you to the general would be as fully settled as if
paid to me, so far as you are concerned; but I wish it to be so, if you
please, for convenience' sake. What is it, Varia?"

Varia had quietly entered the room, and was holding out the portrait of
Nastasia Philipovna to her mother.

Nina Alexandrovna started, and examined the photograph intently, gazing
at it long and sadly. At last she looked up inquiringly at Varia.

"It's a present from herself to him," said Varia; "the question is to be
finally decided this evening."

"This evening!" repeated her mother in a tone of despair, but softly,
as though to herself. "Then it's all settled, of course, and there's no
hope left to us. She has anticipated her answer by the present of her
portrait. Did he show it you himself?" she added, in some surprise.

"You know we have hardly spoken to each other for a whole month. Ptitsin
told me all about it; and the photo was lying under the table, and I
picked it up."

"Prince," asked Nina Alexandrovna, "I wanted to inquire whether you have
known my son long? I think he said that you had only arrived today from
somewhere."

The prince gave a short narrative of what we have heard before, leaving
out the greater part. The two ladies listened intently.

"I did not ask about Gania out of curiosity," said the elder, at last.
"I wish to know how much you know about him, because he said just now
that we need not stand on ceremony with you. What, exactly, does that
mean?"

At this moment Gania and Ptitsin entered the room together, and Nina
Alexandrovna immediately became silent again. The prince remained seated
next to her, but Varia moved to the other end of the room; the portrait
of Nastasia Philipovna remained lying as before on the work-table. Gania
observed it there, and with a frown of annoyance snatched it up and
threw it across to his writing-table, which stood at the other end of
the room.

"Is it today, Gania?" asked Nina Alexandrovna, at last.

"Is what today?" cried the former. Then suddenly recollecting himself,
he turned sharply on the prince. "Oh," he growled, "I see, you are here,
that explains it! Is it a disease, or what, that you can't hold your
tongue? Look here, understand once for all, prince--"

"I am to blame in this, Gania--no one else," said Ptitsin.

Gania glanced inquiringly at the speaker.

"It's better so, you know, Gania--especially as, from one point of view,
the matter may be considered as settled," said Ptitsin; and sitting
down a little way from the table he began to study a paper covered with
pencil writing.

Gania stood and frowned, he expected a family scene. He never thought of
apologizing to the prince, however.

"If it's all settled, Gania, then of course Mr. Ptitsin is right," said
Nina Alexandrovna. "Don't frown. You need not worry yourself, Gania;
I shall ask you no questions. You need not tell me anything you don't
like. I assure you I have quite submitted to your will." She said all
this, knitting away the while as though perfectly calm and composed.

Gania was surprised, but cautiously kept silence and looked at his
mother, hoping that she would express herself more clearly. Nina
Alexandrovna observed his cautiousness and added, with a bitter smile:

"You are still suspicious, I see, and do not believe me; but you may
be quite at your ease. There shall be no more tears, nor questions--not
from my side, at all events. All I wish is that you may be happy, you
know that. I have submitted to my fate; but my heart will always be
with you, whether we remain united, or whether we part. Of course I only
answer for myself--you can hardly expect your sister--"

"My sister again," cried Gania, looking at her with contempt and almost
hate. "Look here, mother, I have already given you my word that I shall
always respect you fully and absolutely, and so shall everyone else in
this house, be it who it may, who shall cross this threshold."

Gania was so much relieved that he gazed at his mother almost
affectionately.

"I was not at all afraid for myself, Gania, as you know well. It was not
for my own sake that I have been so anxious and worried all this time!
They say it is all to be settled to-day. What is to be settled?"

"She has promised to tell me tonight at her own house whether she
consents or not," replied Gania.

"We have been silent on this subject for three weeks," said his mother,
"and it was better so; and now I will only ask you one question. How can
she give her consent and make you a present of her portrait when you do
not love her? How can such a--such a--"

"Practised hand--eh?"
