"Come, let us go in--it's all right," he whispered in the prince's ear.

But it was more serious than he wished to think. As soon as the visitors
had crossed the low dark hall, and entered the narrow reception-room,
furnished with half a dozen cane chairs, and two small card-tables,
Madame Terentieff, in the shrill tones habitual to her, continued her
stream of invectives.

"Are you not ashamed? Are you not ashamed? You barbarian! You tyrant!
You have robbed me of all I possessed--you have sucked my bones to the
marrow. How long shall I be your victim? Shameless, dishonourable man!"

"Marfa Borisovna! Marfa Borisovna! Here is... the Prince Muishkin!
General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin," stammered the disconcerted old
man.

"Would you believe," said the mistress of the house, suddenly addressing
the prince, "would you believe that that man has not even spared my
orphan children? He has stolen everything I possessed, sold everything,
pawned everything; he has left me nothing--nothing! What am I to do with
your IOU's, you cunning, unscrupulous rogue? Answer, devourer I answer,
heart of stone! How shall I feed my orphans? with what shall I nourish
them? And now he has come, he is drunk! He can scarcely stand. How, oh
how, have I offended the Almighty, that He should bring this curse upon
me! Answer, you worthless villain, answer!"

But this was too much for the general.

"Here are twenty-five roubles, Marfa Borisovna... it is all that I
can give... and I owe even these to the prince's generosity--my noble
friend. I have been cruelly deceived. Such is... life... Now... Excuse
me, I am very weak," he continued, standing in the centre of the
room, and bowing to all sides. "I am faint; excuse me! Lenotchka... a
cushion... my dear!"

Lenotchka, a little girl of eight, ran to fetch the cushion at once, and
placed it on the rickety old sofa. The general meant to have said much
more, but as soon as he had stretched himself out, he turned his face to
the wall, and slept the sleep of the just.

With a grave and ceremonious air, Marfa Borisovna motioned the prince to
a chair at one of the card-tables. She seated herself opposite, leaned
her right cheek on her hand, and sat in silence, her eyes fixed on
Muishkin, now and again sighing deeply. The three children, two little
girls and a boy, Lenotchka being the eldest, came and leant on the
table and also stared steadily at him. Presently Colia appeared from the
adjoining room.

"I am very glad indeed to have met you here, Colia," said the prince.
"Can you do something for me? I must see Nastasia Philipovna, and I
asked Ardalion Alexandrovitch just now to take me to her house, but he
has gone to sleep, as you see. Will you show me the way, for I do not
know the street? I have the address, though; it is close to the Grand
Theatre."

"Nastasia Philipovna? She does not live there, and to tell you the truth
my father has never been to her house! It is strange that you should
have depended on him! She lives near Wladimir Street, at the Five
Corners, and it is quite close by. Will you go directly? It is just
half-past nine. I will show you the way with pleasure."

Colia and the prince went off together. Alas! the latter had no money to
pay for a cab, so they were obliged to walk.

"I should have liked to have taken you to see Hippolyte," said Colia.
"He is the eldest son of the lady you met just now, and was in the next
room. He is ill, and has been in bed all day. But he is rather strange,
and extremely sensitive, and I thought he might be upset considering
the circumstances in which you came... Somehow it touches me less, as
it concerns my father, while it is HIS mother. That, of course, makes
a great difference. What is a terrible disgrace to a woman, does not
disgrace a man, at least not in the same way. Perhaps public opinion
is wrong in condemning one sex, and excusing the other. Hippolyte is
an extremely clever boy, but so prejudiced. He is really a slave to his
opinions."

"Do you say he is consumptive?"

"Yes. It really would be happier for him to die young. If I were in his
place I should certainly long for death. He is unhappy about his brother
and sisters, the children you saw. If it were possible, if we only had a
little money, we should leave our respective families, and live together
in a little apartment of our own. It is our dream. But, do you know,
when I was talking over your affair with him, he was angry, and said
that anyone who did not call out a man who had given him a blow was a
coward. He is very irritable to-day, and I left off arguing the matter
with him. So Nastasia Philipovna has invited you to go and see her?"

"To tell the truth, she has not."

"Then how do you come to be going there?" cried Colia, so much
astonished that he stopped short in the middle of the pavement. "And...
and are you going to her At Home in that costume?"

"I don't know, really, whether I shall be allowed in at all. If she will
receive me, so much the better. If not, the matter is ended. As to my
clothes--what can I do?"

"Are you going there for some particular reason, or only as a way of
getting into her society, and that of her friends?"

"No, I have really an object in going... That is, I am going on business
it is difficult to explain, but..."

"Well, whether you go on business or not is your affair, I do not want
to know. The only important thing, in my eyes, is that you should not
be going there simply for the pleasure of spending your evening in such
company--cocottes, generals, usurers! If that were the case I should
despise and laugh at you. There are terribly few honest people here,
and hardly any whom one can respect, although people put on airs--Varia
especially! Have you noticed, prince, how many adventurers there are
nowadays? Especially here, in our dear Russia. How it has happened I
never can understand. There used to be a certain amount of solidity in
all things, but now what happens? Everything is exposed to the public
gaze, veils are thrown back, every wound is probed by careless fingers.
We are for ever present at an orgy of scandalous revelations. Parents
blush when they remember their old-fashioned morality. At Moscow lately
a father was heard urging his son to stop at nothing--at nothing, mind
you!--to get money! The press seized upon the story, of course, and now
it is public property. Look at my father, the general! See what he is,
and yet, I assure you, he is an honest man! Only... he drinks too much,
and his morals are not all we could desire. Yes, that's true! I pity
him, to tell the truth, but I dare not say so, because everybody would
laugh at me--but I do pity him! And who are the really clever men, after
all? Money-grubbers, every one of them, from the first to the last.
Hippolyte finds excuses for money-lending, and says it is a necessity.
He talks about the economic movement, and the ebb and flow of capital;
the devil knows what he means. It makes me angry to hear him talk so,
but he is soured by his troubles. Just imagine-the general keeps his
mother-but she lends him money! She lends it for a week or ten days
at very high interest! Isn't it disgusting? And then, you would hardly
believe it, but my mother--Nina Alexandrovna--helps Hippolyte in all
sorts of ways, sends him money and clothes. She even goes as far as
helping the children, through Hippolyte, because their mother cares
nothing about them, and Varia does the same."

"Well, just now you said there were no honest nor good people about,
that there were only money-grubbers--and here they are quite close at
hand, these honest and good people, your mother and Varia! I think
there is a good deal of moral strength in helping people in such
circumstances."

"Varia does it from pride, and likes showing off, and giving herself
airs. As to my mother, I really do admire her--yes, and honour her.
Hippolyte, hardened as he is, feels it. He laughed at first, and thought
it vulgar of her--but now, he is sometimes quite touched and overcome by
her kindness. H'm! You call that being strong and good? I will remember
that! Gania knows nothing about it. He would say that it was encouraging
vice."

"Ah, Gania knows nothing about it? It seems there are many things that
Gania does not know," exclaimed the prince, as he considered Colia's
last words.

"Do you know, I like you very much indeed, prince? I shall never forget
about this afternoon."

"I like you too, Colia."

"Listen to me! You are going to live here, are you not?" said Colia.
"I mean to get something to do directly, and earn money. Then shall we
three live together? You, and I, and Hippolyte? We will hire a flat, and
let the general come and visit us. What do you say?"

"It would be very pleasant," returned the prince. "But we must see. I am
really rather worried just now. What! are we there already? Is that the
house? What a long flight of steps! And there's a porter! Well, Colia I
don't know what will come of it all."

The prince seemed quite distracted for the moment.

"You must tell me all about it tomorrow! Don't be afraid. I wish you
success; we agree so entirely I that can do so, although I do not
understand why you are here. Good-bye!" cried Colia excitedly. "Now I
will rush back and tell Hippolyte all about our plans and proposals! But
as to your getting in--don't be in the least afraid. You will see her.
She is so original about everything. It's the first floor. The porter
will show you."

XIII.

THE prince was very nervous as he reached the outer door; but he did his
best to encourage himself with the reflection that the worst thing that
could happen to him would be that he would not be received, or, perhaps,
received, then laughed at for coming.

But there was another question, which terrified him considerably,
and that was: what was he going to do when he DID get in? And to this
question he could fashion no satisfactory reply.

If only he could find an opportunity of coming close up to Nastasia
Philipovna and saying to her: "Don't ruin yourself by marrying this man.
He does not love you, he only loves your money. He told me so himself,
and so did Aglaya Ivanovna, and I have come on purpose to warn you"--but
even that did not seem quite a legitimate or practicable thing to do.
Then, again, there was another delicate question, to which he could not
find an answer; dared not, in fact, think of it; but at the very idea
of which he trembled and blushed. However, in spite of all his fears and
heart-quakings he went in, and asked for Nastasia Philipovna.

Nastasia occupied a medium-sized, but distinctly tasteful, flat,
beautifully furnished and arranged. At one period of these five years
of Petersburg life, Totski had certainly not spared his expenditure upon
her. He had calculated upon her eventual love, and tried to tempt her
with a lavish outlay upon comforts and luxuries, knowing too well how
easily the heart accustoms itself to comforts, and how difficult it is
to tear one's self away from luxuries which have become habitual and,
little by little, indispensable.

Nastasia did not reject all this, she even loved her comforts and
luxuries, but, strangely enough, never became, in the least degree,
dependent upon them, and always gave the impression that she could do
just as well without them. In fact, she went so far as to inform Totski
on several occasions that such was the case, which the latter gentleman
considered a very unpleasant communication indeed.

But, of late, Totski had observed many strange and original features
and characteristics in Nastasia, which he had neither known nor reckoned
upon in former times, and some of these fascinated him, even now, in
spite of the fact that all his old calculations with regard to her were
long ago cast to the winds.

A maid opened the door for the prince (Nastasia's servants were all
females) and, to his surprise, received his request to announce him to
her mistress without any astonishment. Neither his dirty boots, nor his
wide-brimmed hat, nor his sleeveless cloak, nor his evident confusion of
manner, produced the least impression upon her. She helped him off with
his cloak, and begged him to wait a moment in the ante-room while she
announced him.

The company assembled at Nastasia Philipovna's consisted of none but her
most intimate friends, and formed a very small party in comparison with
her usual gatherings on this anniversary.

In the first place there were present Totski, and General Epanchin.
They were both highly amiable, but both appeared to be labouring under
a half-hidden feeling of anxiety as to the result of Nastasia's
deliberations with regard to Gania, which result was to be made public
this evening.

Then, of course, there was Gania who was by no means so amiable as
his elders, but stood apart, gloomy, and miserable, and silent. He had
determined not to bring Varia with him; but Nastasia had not even asked
after her, though no sooner had he arrived than she had reminded him of
the episode between himself and the prince. The general, who had heard
nothing of it before, began to listen with some interest, while Gania,
drily, but with perfect candour, went through the whole history,
including the fact of his apology to the prince. He finished by
declaring that the prince was a most extraordinary man, and goodness
knows why he had been considered an idiot hitherto, for he was very far
from being one.

Nastasia listened to all this with great interest; but the conversation
soon turned to Rogojin and his visit, and this theme proved of the
greatest attraction to both Totski and the general.

Ptitsin was able to afford some particulars as to Rogojin's conduct
since the afternoon. He declared that he had been busy finding money for
the latter ever since, and up to nine o'clock, Rogojin having declared
that he must absolutely have a hundred thousand roubles by the evening.
He added that Rogojin was drunk, of course; but that he thought the
money would be forthcoming, for the excited and intoxicated rapture of
the fellow impelled him to give any interest or premium that was asked
of him, and there were several others engaged in beating up the money,
also.

All this news was received by the company with somewhat gloomy interest.
Nastasia was silent, and would not say what she thought about it. Gania
was equally uncommunicative. The general seemed the most anxious of all,
and decidedly uneasy. The present of pearls which he had prepared with
so much joy in the morning had been accepted but coldly, and Nastasia
had smiled rather disagreeably as she took it from him. Ferdishenko was
the only person present in good spirits.

Totski himself, who had the reputation of being a capital talker, and
was usually the life and soul of these entertainments, was as silent
as any on this occasion, and sat in a state of, for him, most uncommon
perturbation.

The rest of the guests (an old tutor or schoolmaster, goodness knows
why invited; a young man, very timid, and shy and silent; a rather
loud woman of about forty, apparently an actress; and a very pretty,
well-dressed German lady who hardly said a word all the evening) not
only had no gift for enlivening the proceedings, but hardly knew what to
say for themselves when addressed. Under these circumstances the arrival
of the prince came almost as a godsend.

The announcement of his name gave rise to some surprise and to some
smiles, especially when it became evident, from Nastasia's astonished
look, that she had not thought of inviting him. But her astonishment
once over, Nastasia showed such satisfaction that all prepared to greet
the prince with cordial smiles of welcome.

"Of course," remarked General Epanchin, "he does this out of pure
innocence. It's a little dangerous, perhaps, to encourage this sort of
freedom; but it is rather a good thing that he has arrived just at this
moment. He may enliven us a little with his originalities."

"Especially as he asked himself," said Ferdishenko.

"What's that got to do with it?" asked the general, who loathed
Ferdishenko.

"Why, he must pay toll for his entrance," explained the latter.

"H'm! Prince Muishkin is not Ferdishenko," said the general,
impatiently. This worthy gentleman could never quite reconcile himself
to the idea of meeting Ferdishenko in society, and on an equal footing.

"Oh general, spare Ferdishenko!" replied the other, smiling. "I have
special privileges."

"What do you mean by special privileges?"

"Once before I had the honour of stating them to the company. I will
repeat the explanation to-day for your excellency's benefit. You see,
excellency, all the world is witty and clever except myself. I am
neither. As a kind of compensation I am allowed to tell the truth, for
it is a well-known fact that only stupid people tell 'the truth. Added
to this, I am a spiteful man, just because I am not clever. If I am
offended or injured I bear it quite patiently until the man injuring
me meets with some misfortune. Then I remember, and take my revenge. I
return the injury sevenfold, as Ivan Petrovitch Ptitsin says. (Of course
he never does so himself.) Excellency, no doubt you recollect Kryloff's
fable, 'The Lion and the Ass'? Well now, that's you and I. That fable
was written precisely for us."

"You seem to be talking nonsense again, Ferdishenko," growled the
general.

"What is the matter, excellency? I know how to keep my place. When I
said just now that we, you and I, were the lion and the ass of Kryloff's
fable, of course it is understood that I take the role of the ass. Your
excellency is the lion of which the fable remarks:

'A mighty lion, terror of the woods, Was shorn of his great prowess by
old age.'

And I, your excellency, am the ass."

"I am of your opinion on that last point," said Ivan Fedorovitch, with
ill-concealed irritation.

All this was no doubt extremely coarse, and moreover it was
premeditated, but after all Ferdishenko had persuaded everyone to accept
him as a buffoon.

"If I am admitted and tolerated here," he had said one day, "it is
simply because I talk in this way. How can anyone possibly receive
such a man as I am? I quite understand. Now, could I, a Ferdishenko,
be allowed to sit shoulder to shoulder with a clever man like Afanasy
Ivanovitch? There is one explanation, only one. I am given the position
because it is so entirely inconceivable!"

But these vulgarities seemed to please Nastasia Philipovna, although too
often they were both rude and offensive. Those who wished to go to her
house were forced to put up with Ferdishenko. Possibly the latter was
not mistaken in imagining that he was received simply in order to annoy
Totski, who disliked him extremely. Gania also was often made the butt
of the jester's sarcasms, who used this method of keeping in Nastasia
Philipovna's good graces.

"The prince will begin by singing us a fashionable ditty," remarked
Ferdishenko, and looked at the mistress of the house, to see what she
would say.

"I don't think so, Ferdishenko; please be quiet," answered Nastasia
Philipovna dryly.

"A-ah! if he is to be under special patronage, I withdraw my claws."

But Nastasia Philipovna had now risen and advanced to meet the prince.

"I was so sorry to have forgotten to ask you to come, when I saw you,"
she said, "and I am delighted to be able to thank you personally now,
and to express my pleasure at your resolution."

So saying she gazed into his eyes, longing to see whether she could make
any guess as to the explanation of his motive in coming to her house.
The prince would very likely have made some reply to her kind words, but
he was so dazzled by her appearance that he could not speak.

Nastasia noticed this with satisfaction. She was in full dress this
evening; and her appearance was certainly calculated to impress all
beholders. She took his hand and led him towards her other guests. But
just before they reached the drawing-room door, the prince stopped her,
and hurriedly and in great agitation whispered to her:

"You are altogether perfection; even your pallor and thinness are
perfect; one could not wish you otherwise. I did so wish to come and see
you. I--forgive me, please--"

"Don't apologize," said Nastasia, laughing; "you spoil the whole
originality of the thing. I think what they say about you must be true,
that you are so original.--So you think me perfection, do you?"

"Yes."

"H'm! Well, you may be a good reader of riddles but you are wrong THERE,
at all events. I'll remind you of this, tonight."

Nastasia introduced the prince to her guests, to most of whom he was
already known.

Totski immediately made some amiable remark. Al seemed to brighten up at
once, and the conversation became general. Nastasia made the prince sit
down next to herself.

"Dear me, there's nothing so very curious about the prince dropping in,
after all," remarked Ferdishenko.

"It's quite a clear case," said the hitherto silent Gania. "I have
watched the prince almost all day, ever since the moment when he first
saw Nastasia Philipovna's portrait, at General Epanchin's. I remember
thinking at the time what I am now pretty sure of; and what, I may say
in passing, the prince confessed to myself."

Gania said all this perfectly seriously, and without the slightest
appearance of joking; indeed, he seemed strangely gloomy.

"I did not confess anything to you," said the prince, blushing. "I only
answered your question."

"Bravo! That's frank, at any rate!" shouted Ferdishenko, and there was
general laughter.

"Oh prince, prince! I never should have thought it of you;" said General
Epanchin. "And I imagined you a philosopher! Oh, you silent fellows!"

"Judging from the fact that the prince blushed at this innocent joke,
like a young girl, I should think that he must, as an honourable man,
harbour the noblest intentions," said the old toothless schoolmaster,
most unexpectedly; he had not so much as opened his mouth before.
This remark provoked general mirth, and the old fellow himself laughed
loudest of the lot, but ended with a stupendous fit of coughing.

Nastasia Philipovna, who loved originality and drollery of all kinds,
was apparently very fond of this old man, and rang the bell for more tea
to stop his coughing. It was now half-past ten o'clock.

"Gentlemen, wouldn't you like a little champagne now?" she asked. "I
have it all ready; it will cheer us up--do now--no ceremony!"

This invitation to drink, couched, as it was, in such informal terms,
came very strangely from Nastasia Philipovna. Her usual entertainments
were not quite like this; there was more style about them. However, the
wine was not refused; each guest took a glass excepting Gania, who drank
nothing.

It was extremely difficult to account for Nastasia's strange condition
of mind, which became more evident each moment, and which none could
avoid noticing.

She took her glass, and vowed she would empty it three times that
evening. She was hysterical, and laughed aloud every other minute
with no apparent reason--the next moment relapsing into gloom and
thoughtfulness.

Some of her guests suspected that she must be ill; but concluded at last
that she was expecting something, for she continued to look at her watch
impatiently and unceasingly; she was most absent and strange.

"You seem to be a little feverish tonight," said the actress.

"Yes; I feel quite ill. I have been obliged to put on this shawl--I feel
so cold," replied Nastasia. She certainly had grown very pale, and every
now and then she tried to suppress a trembling in her limbs.

"Had we not better allow our hostess to retire?" asked Totski of the
general.

"Not at all, gentlemen, not at all! Your presence is absolutely
necessary to me tonight," said Nastasia, significantly.

As most of those present were aware that this evening a certain very
important decision was to be taken, these words of Nastasia Philipovna's
appeared to be fraught with much hidden interest. The general and Totski
exchanged looks; Gania fidgeted convulsively in his chair.

"Let's play at some game!" suggested the actress.

"I know a new and most delightful game, added Ferdishenko.

"What is it?" asked the actress.

"Well, when we tried it we were a party of people, like this, for
instance; and somebody proposed that each of us, without leaving his
place at the table, should relate something about himself. It had to be
something that he really and honestly considered the very worst action
he had ever committed in his life. But he was to be honest--that was the
chief point! He wasn't to be allowed to lie."

"What an extraordinary idea!" said the general.

"That's the beauty of it, general!"

"It's a funny notion," said Totski, "and yet quite natural--it's only a
new way of boasting."

"Perhaps that is just what was so fascinating about it."

"Why, it would be a game to cry over--not to laugh at!" said the
actress.

"Did it succeed?" asked Nastasia Philipovna. "Come, let's try it, let's
try it; we really are not quite so jolly as we might be--let's try it!
We may like it; it's original, at all events!"

"Yes," said Ferdishenko; "it's a good idea--come along--the men begin.
Of course no one need tell a story if he prefers to be disobliging. We
must draw lots! Throw your slips of paper, gentlemen, into this hat, and
the prince shall draw for turns. It's a very simple game; all you have
to do is to tell the story of the worst action of your life. It's as
simple as anything. I'll prompt anyone who forgets the rules!"

No one liked the idea much. Some smiled, some frowned some objected,
but faintly, not wishing to oppose Nastasia's wishes; for this new idea
seemed to be rather well received by her. She was still in an excited,
hysterical state, laughing convulsively at nothing and everything. Her
eyes were blazing, and her cheeks showed two bright red spots against
the white. The melancholy appearance of some of her guests seemed to add
to her sarcastic humour, and perhaps the very cynicism and cruelty of
the game proposed by Ferdishenko pleased her. At all events she was
attracted by the idea, and gradually her guests came round to her side;
the thing was original, at least, and might turn out to be amusing. "And
supposing it's something that one--one can't speak about before ladies?"
asked the timid and silent young man.

"Why, then of course, you won't say anything about it. As if there
are not plenty of sins to your score without the need of those!" said
Ferdishenko.

"But I really don't know which of my actions is the worst," said the
lively actress.

"Ladies are exempted if they like."

"And how are you to know that one isn't lying? And if one lies the whole
point of the game is lost," said Gania.

"Oh, but think how delightful to hear how one's friends lie! Besides
you needn't be afraid, Gania; everybody knows what your worst action is
without the need of any lying on your part. Only think, gentlemen,"--and
Ferdishenko here grew quite enthusiastic, "only think with what eyes we
shall observe one another tomorrow, after our tales have been told!"

"But surely this is a joke, Nastasia Philipovna?" asked Totski. "You
don't really mean us to play this game."

"Whoever is afraid of wolves had better not go into the wood," said
Nastasia, smiling.

"But, pardon me, Mr. Ferdishenko, is it possible to make a game out of
this kind of thing?" persisted Totski, growing more and more uneasy. "I
assure you it can't be a success."

"And why not? Why, the last time I simply told straight off about how I
stole three roubles."

"Perhaps so; but it is hardly possible that you told it so that it
seemed like truth, or so that you were believed. And, as Gavrila
Ardalionovitch has said, the least suggestion of a falsehood takes all
point out of the game. It seems to me that sincerity, on the other hand,
is only possible if combined with a kind of bad taste that would be
utterly out of place here."

"How subtle you are, Afanasy Ivanovitch! You astonish me," cried
Ferdishenko. "You will remark, gentleman, that in saying that I
could not recount the story of my theft so as to be believed, Afanasy
Ivanovitch has very ingeniously implied that I am not capable of
thieving--(it would have been bad taste to say so openly); and all the
time he is probably firmly convinced, in his own mind, that I am very
well capable of it! But now, gentlemen, to business! Put in your slips,
ladies and gentlemen--is yours in, Mr. Totski? So--then we are all
ready; now prince, draw, please." The prince silently put his hand into
the hat, and drew the names. Ferdishenko was first, then Ptitsin, then
the general, Totski next, his own fifth, then Gania, and so on; the
ladies did not draw.

"Oh, dear! oh, dear!" cried Ferdishenko. "I did so hope the prince would
come out first, and then the general. Well, gentlemen, I suppose I
must set a good example! What vexes me much is that I am such an
insignificant creature that it matters nothing to anybody whether I have
done bad actions or not! Besides, which am I to choose? It's an embarras
de richesse. Shall I tell how I became a thief on one occasion only, to
convince Afanasy Ivanovitch that it is possible to steal without being a
thief?"

"Do go on, Ferdishenko, and don't make unnecessary preface, or you'll
never finish," said Nastasia Philipovna. All observed how irritable and
cross she had become since her last burst of laughter; but none the less
obstinately did she stick to her absurd whim about this new game. Totski
sat looking miserable enough. The general lingered over his champagne,
and seemed to be thinking of some story for the time when his turn
should come.

XIV.

"I have no wit, Nastasia Philipovna," began Ferdishenko, "and therefore
I talk too much, perhaps. Were I as witty, now, as Mr. Totski or the
general, I should probably have sat silent all the evening, as they
have. Now, prince, what do you think?--are there not far more thieves
than honest men in this world? Don't you think we may say there does
not exist a single person so honest that he has never stolen anything
whatever in his life?"

"What a silly idea," said the actress. "Of course it is not the case. I
have never stolen anything, for one."

"H'm! very well, Daria Alexeyevna; you have not stolen anything--agreed.
But how about the prince, now--look how he is blushing!"

"I think you are partially right, but you exaggerate," said the prince,
who had certainly blushed up, of a sudden, for some reason or other.

"Ferdishenko--either tell us your story, or be quiet, and mind your own
business. You exhaust all patience," cuttingly and irritably remarked
Nastasia Philipovna.

"Immediately, immediately! As for my story, gentlemen, it is too stupid
and absurd to tell you.

"I assure you I am not a thief, and yet I have stolen; I cannot explain
why. It was at Semeon Ivanovitch Ishenka's country house, one Sunday. He
had a dinner party. After dinner the men stayed at the table over their
wine. It struck me to ask the daughter of the house to play something
on the piano; so I passed through the corner room to join the ladies. In
that room, on Maria Ivanovna's writing-table, I observed a three-rouble
note. She must have taken it out for some purpose, and left it lying
there. There was no one about. I took up the note and put it in my
pocket; why, I can't say. I don't know what possessed me to do it, but
it was done, and I went quickly back to the dining-room and reseated
myself at the dinner-table. I sat and waited there in a great state of
excitement. I talked hard, and told lots of stories, and laughed like
mad; then I joined the ladies.

"In half an hour or so the loss was discovered, and the servants were
being put under examination. Daria, the housemaid was suspected. I
exhibited the greatest interest and sympathy, and I remember that
poor Daria quite lost her head, and that I began assuring her, before
everyone, that I would guarantee her forgiveness on the part of her
mistress, if she would confess her guilt. They all stared at the girl,
and I remember a wonderful attraction in the reflection that here was I
sermonizing away, with the money in my own pocket all the while. I went
and spent the three roubles that very evening at a restaurant. I went in
and asked for a bottle of Lafite, and drank it up; I wanted to be rid of
the money.

"I did not feel much remorse either then or afterwards; but I would not
repeat the performance--believe it or not as you please. There--that's
all."

"Only, of course that's not nearly your worst action," said the actress,
with evident dislike in her face.

"That was a psychological phenomenon, not an action," remarked Totski.

"And what about the maid?" asked Nastasia Philipovna, with undisguised
contempt.

"Oh, she was turned out next day, of course. It's a very strict
household, there!"

"And you allowed it?"

"I should think so, rather! I was not going to return and confess
next day," laughed Ferdishenko, who seemed a little surprised at the
disagreeable impression which his story had made on all parties.

"How mean you were!" said Nastasia.

"Bah! you wish to hear a man tell of his worst actions, and you expect
the story to come out goody-goody! One's worst actions always are mean.
We shall see what the general has to say for himself now. All is not
gold that glitters, you know; and because a man keeps his carriage he
need not be specially virtuous, I assure you, all sorts of people keep
carriages. And by what means?"

In a word, Ferdishenko was very angry and rapidly forgetting himself;
his whole face was drawn with passion. Strange as it may appear, he had
expected much better success for his story. These little errors of taste
on Ferdishenko's part occurred very frequently. Nastasia trembled with
rage, and looked fixedly at him, whereupon he relapsed into alarmed
silence. He realized that he had gone a little too far.

"Had we not better end this game?" asked Totski.

"It's my turn, but I plead exemption," said Ptitsin.

"You don't care to oblige us?" asked Nastasia.

"I cannot, I assure you. I confess I do not understand how anyone can
play this game."

"Then, general, it's your turn," continued Nastasia Philipovna, "and if
you refuse, the whole game will fall through, which will disappoint me
very much, for I was looking forward to relating a certain 'page of my
own life.' I am only waiting for you and Afanasy Ivanovitch to have your
turns, for I require the support of your example," she added, smiling.

"Oh, if you put it in that way," cried the general, excitedly, "I'm
ready to tell the whole story of my life, but I must confess that I
prepared a little story in anticipation of my turn."

Nastasia smiled amiably at him; but evidently her depression and
irritability were increasing with every moment. Totski was dreadfully
alarmed to hear her promise a revelation out of her own life.

"I, like everyone else," began the general, "have committed certain not
altogether graceful actions, so to speak, during the course of my life.
But the strangest thing of all in my case is, that I should consider the
little anecdote which I am now about to give you as a confession of
the worst of my 'bad actions.' It is thirty-five years since it all
happened, and yet I cannot to this very day recall the circumstances
without, as it were, a sudden pang at the heart.

"It was a silly affair--I was an ensign at the time. You know
ensigns--their blood is boiling water, their circumstances generally
penurious. Well, I had a servant Nikifor who used to do everything for
me in my quarters, economized and managed for me, and even laid hands on
anything he could find (belonging to other people), in order to augment
our household goods; but a faithful, honest fellow all the same.

"I was strict, but just by nature. At that time we were stationed in
a small town. I was quartered at an old widow's house, a lieutenant's
widow of eighty years of age. She lived in a wretched little wooden
house, and had not even a servant, so poor was she.

"Her relations had all died off--her husband was dead and buried forty
years since; and a niece, who had lived with her and bullied her up to
three years ago, was dead too; so that she was quite alone.

"Well, I was precious dull with her, especially as she was so childish
that there was nothing to be got out of her. Eventually, she stole a
fowl of mine; the business is a mystery to this day; but it could have
been no one but herself. I requested to be quartered somewhere else,
and was shifted to the other end of the town, to the house of a merchant
with a large family, and a long beard, as I remember him. Nikifor and I
were delighted to go; but the old lady was not pleased at our departure.

"Well, a day or two afterwards, when I returned from drill, Nikifor
says to me: 'We oughtn't to have left our tureen with the old lady, I've
nothing to serve the soup in.'

"I asked how it came about that the tureen had been left. Nikifor
explained that the old lady refused to give it up, because, she said,
we had broken her bowl, and she must have our tureen in place of it; she
had declared that I had so arranged the matter with herself.

"This baseness on her part of course aroused my young blood to fever
heat; I jumped up, and away I flew.

"I arrived at the old woman's house beside myself. She was sitting in
a corner all alone, leaning her face on her hand. I fell on her like a
clap of thunder. 'You old wretch!' I yelled and all that sort of thing,
in real Russian style. Well, when I began cursing at her, a strange
thing happened. I looked at her, and she stared back with her eyes
starting out of her head, but she did not say a word. She seemed to
sway about as she sat, and looked and looked at me in the strangest
way. Well, I soon stopped swearing and looked closer at her, asked her
questions, but not a word could I get out of her. The flies were buzzing
about the room and only this sound broke the silence; the sun was
setting outside; I didn't know what to make of it, so I went away.

"Before I reached home I was met and summoned to the major's, so that it
was some while before I actually got there. When I came in, Nikifor met
me. 'Have you heard, sir, that our old lady is dead?' 'DEAD, when?' 'Oh,
an hour and a half ago.' That meant nothing more nor less than that she
was dying at the moment when I pounced on her and began abusing her.

"This produced a great effect upon me. I used to dream of the poor old
woman at nights. I really am not superstitious, but two days after, I
went to her funeral, and as time went on I thought more and more about
her. I said to myself, 'This woman, this human being, lived to a great
age. She had children, a husband and family, friends and relations; her
household was busy and cheerful; she was surrounded by smiling faces;
and then suddenly they are gone, and she is left alone like a solitary
fly... like a fly, cursed with the burden of her age. At last, God calls
her to Himself. At sunset, on a lovely summer's evening, my little old
woman passes away--a thought, you will notice, which offers much food
for reflection--and behold! instead of tears and prayers to start her
on her last journey, she has insults and jeers from a young ensign, who
stands before her with his hands in his pockets, making a terrible row
about a soup tureen!' Of course I was to blame, and even now that I have
time to look back at it calmly, I pity the poor old thing no less.
I repeat that I wonder at myself, for after all I was not really
responsible. Why did she take it into her head to die at that moment?
But the more I thought of it, the more I felt the weight of it upon my
mind; and I never got quite rid of the impression until I put a couple
of old women into an almshouse and kept them there at my own expense.
There, that's all. I repeat I dare say I have committed many a grievous
sin in my day; but I cannot help always looking back upon this as the
worst action I have ever perpetrated."

"H'm! and instead of a bad action, your excellency has detailed one of
your noblest deeds," said Ferdishenko. "Ferdishenko is 'done.'"

"Dear me, general," said Nastasia Philipovna, absently, "I really never
imagined you had such a good heart."

The general laughed with great satisfaction, and applied himself once
more to the champagne.

It was now Totski's turn, and his story was awaited with great
curiosity--while all eyes turned on Nastasia Philipovna, as though
anticipating that his revelation must be connected somehow with her.
Nastasia, during the whole of his story, pulled at the lace trimming of
her sleeve, and never once glanced at the speaker. Totski was a handsome
man, rather stout, with a very polite and dignified manner. He was
always well dressed, and his linen was exquisite. He had plump white
hands, and wore a magnificent diamond ring on one finger.

"What simplifies the duty before me considerably, in my opinion," he
began, "is that I am bound to recall and relate the very worst action of
my life. In such circumstances there can, of course, be no doubt. One's
conscience very soon informs one what is the proper narrative to tell. I
admit, that among the many silly and thoughtless actions of my life, the
memory of one comes prominently forward and reminds me that it lay long
like a stone on my heart. Some twenty years since, I paid a visit to
Platon Ordintzeff at his country-house. He had just been elected marshal
of the nobility, and had come there with his young wife for the winter
holidays. Anfisa Alexeyevna's birthday came off just then, too, and
there were two balls arranged. At that time Dumas-fils' beautiful work,
La Dame aux Camelias--a novel which I consider imperishable--had just
come into fashion. In the provinces all the ladies were in raptures over
it, those who had read it, at least. Camellias were all the fashion.
Everyone inquired for them, everybody wanted them; and a grand lot of
camellias are to be got in a country town--as you all know--and two
balls to provide for!

"Poor Peter Volhofskoi was desperately in love with Anfisa Alexeyevna.
I don't know whether there was anything--I mean I don't know whether
he could possibly have indulged in any hope. The poor fellow was beside
himself to get her a bouquet of camellias. Countess Sotski and Sophia
Bespalova, as everyone knew, were coming with white camellia bouquets.
Anfisa wished for red ones, for effect. Well, her husband Platon was
driven desperate to find some. And the day before the ball, Anfisa's
rival snapped up the only red camellias to be had in the place, from
under Platon's nose, and Platon--wretched man--was done for. Now if
Peter had only been able to step in at this moment with a red bouquet,
his little hopes might have made gigantic strides. A woman's gratitude
under such circumstances would have been boundless--but it was
practically an impossibility.

"The night before the ball I met Peter, looking radiant. 'What is it?'
I ask. 'I've found them, Eureka!" 'No! where, where?' 'At Ekshaisk (a
little town fifteen miles off) there's a rich old merchant, who keeps
a lot of canaries, has no children, and he and his wife are devoted to
flowers. He's got some camellias.' 'And what if he won't let you have
them?' 'I'll go on my knees and implore till I get them. I won't go
away.' 'When shall you start?' 'Tomorrow morning at five o'clock.' 'Go
on,' I said, 'and good luck to you.'

"I was glad for the poor fellow, and went home. But an idea got hold of
me somehow. I don't know how. It was nearly two in the morning. I rang
the bell and ordered the coachman to be waked up and sent to me. He
came. I gave him a tip of fifteen roubles, and told him to get the
carriage ready at once. In half an hour it was at the door. I got in and
off we went.

"By five I drew up at the Ekshaisky inn. I waited there till dawn, and
soon after six I was off, and at the old merchant Trepalaf's.

"'Camellias!' I said, 'father, save me, save me, let me have some
camellias!' He was a tall, grey old man--a terrible-looking old
gentleman. 'Not a bit of it,' he says. 'I won't.' Down I went on my
knees. 'Don't say so, don't--think what you're doing!' I cried; 'it's a
matter of life and death!' 'If that's the case, take them,' says he.
So up I get, and cut such a bouquet of red camellias! He had a whole
greenhouse full of them--lovely ones. The old fellow sighs. I pull out a
hundred roubles. 'No, no!' says he, 'don't insult me that way.' 'Oh, if
that's the case, give it to the village hospital,' I say. 'Ah,' he says,
'that's quite a different matter; that's good of you and generous. I'll
pay it in there for you with pleasure.' I liked that old fellow, Russian
to the core, de la vraie souche. I went home in raptures, but took
another road in order to avoid Peter. Immediately on arriving I sent up
the bouquet for Anfisa to see when she awoke.

"You may imagine her ecstasy, her gratitude. The wretched Platon, who
had almost died since yesterday of the reproaches showered upon him,
wept on my shoulder. Of course poor Peter had no chance after this.

"I thought he would cut my throat at first, and went about armed ready
to meet him. But he took it differently; he fainted, and had brain fever
and convulsions. A month after, when he had hardly recovered, he went
off to the Crimea, and there he was shot.

"I assure you this business left me no peace for many a long year. Why
did I do it? I was not in love with her myself; I'm afraid it was simply
mischief--pure 'cussedness' on my part.

"If I hadn't seized that bouquet from under his nose he might have been
alive now, and a happy man. He might have been successful in life, and
never have gone to fight the Turks."

Totski ended his tale with the same dignity that had characterized its
commencement.

Nastasia Philipovna's eyes were flashing in a most unmistakable way,
now; and her lips were all a-quiver by the time Totski finished his
story.

All present watched both of them with curiosity.

"You were right, Totski," said Nastasia, "it is a dull game and a stupid
one. I'll just tell my story, as I promised, and then we'll play cards."

"Yes, but let's have the story first!" cried the general.

"Prince," said Nastasia Philipovna, unexpectedly turning to Muishkin,
"here are my old friends, Totski and General Epanchin, who wish to marry
me off. Tell me what you think. Shall I marry or not? As you decide, so
shall it be."

Totski grew white as a sheet. The general was struck dumb. All present
started and listened intently. Gania sat rooted to his chair.

"Marry whom?" asked the prince, faintly.

"Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin," said Nastasia, firmly and evenly.

There were a few seconds of dead silence.

The prince tried to speak, but could not form his words; a great weight
seemed to lie upon his breast and suffocate him.

"N-no! don't marry him!" he whispered at last, drawing his breath with
an effort.

"So be it, then. Gavrila Ardalionovitch," she spoke solemnly and
forcibly, "you hear the prince's decision? Take it as my decision; and
let that be the end of the matter for good and all."

"Nastasia Philipovna!" cried Totski, in a quaking voice.

"Nastasia Philipovna!" said the general, in persuasive but agitated
tones.

Everyone in the room fidgeted in their places, and waited to see what
was coming next.

"Well, gentlemen!" she continued, gazing around in apparent
astonishment; "what do you all look so alarmed about? Why are you so
upset?"

"But--recollect, Nastasia Philipovna." stammered Totski, "you gave a
promise, quite a free one, and--and you might have spared us this. I am
confused and bewildered, I know; but, in a word, at such a moment, and
before company, and all so-so-irregular, finishing off a game with a
serious matter like this, a matter of honour, and of heart, and--"

"I don't follow you, Afanasy Ivanovitch; you are losing your head. In
the first place, what do you mean by 'before company'? Isn't the company
good enough for you? And what's all that about 'a game'? I wished to
tell my little story, and I told it! Don't you like it? You heard what
I said to the prince? 'As you decide, so it shall be!' If he had said
'yes,' I should have given my consent! But he said 'no,' so I refused.
Here was my whole life hanging on his one word! Surely I was serious
enough?"

"The prince! What on earth has the prince got to do with it? Who the
deuce is the prince?" cried the general, who could conceal his wrath no
longer.

"The prince has this to do with it--that I see in him for the first
time in all my life, a man endowed with real truthfulness of spirit, and
I trust him. He trusted me at first sight, and I trust him!"

"It only remains for me, then, to thank Nastasia Philipovna for the
great delicacy with which she has treated me," said Gania, as pale as
death, and with quivering lips. "That is my plain duty, of course; but
the prince--what has he to do in the matter?"

"I see what you are driving at," said Nastasia Philipovna. "You imply
that the prince is after the seventy-five thousand roubles--I quite
understand you. Mr. Totski, I forgot to say, 'Take your seventy-five
thousand roubles'--I don't want them. I let you go free for nothing take
your freedom! You must need it. Nine years and three months' captivity
is enough for anybody. Tomorrow I shall start afresh--today I am a free
agent for the first time in my life.

"General, you must take your pearls back, too--give them to your
wife--here they are! Tomorrow I shall leave this flat altogether, and
then there'll be no more of these pleasant little social gatherings,
ladies and gentlemen."

So saying, she scornfully rose from her seat as though to depart.

"Nastasia Philipovna! Nastasia Philipovna!"

The words burst involuntarily from every mouth. All present started up
in bewildered excitement; all surrounded her; all had listened uneasily
to her wild, disconnected sentences. All felt that something had
happened, something had gone very far wrong indeed, but no one could
make head or tail of the matter.

At this moment there was a furious ring at the bell, and a great knock
at the door--exactly similar to the one which had startled the company
at Gania's house in the afternoon.

"Ah, ah! here's the climax at last, at half-past twelve!" cried Nastasia
Philipovna. "Sit down, gentlemen, I beg you. Something is about to
happen."

So saying, she reseated herself; a strange smile played on her lips. She
sat quite still, but watched the door in a fever of impatience.

"Rogojin and his hundred thousand roubles, no doubt of it," muttered
Ptitsin to himself.

XV.

Katia, the maid-servant, made her appearance, terribly frightened.

"Goodness knows what it means, ma'am," she said. "There is a whole
collection of men come--all tipsy--and want to see you. They say that
'it's Rogojin, and she knows all about it.'"

"It's all right, Katia, let them all in at once."

"Surely not ALL, ma'am? They seem so disorderly--it's dreadful to see
them."

"Yes ALL, Katia, all--every one of them. Let them in, or they'll come
in whether you like or no. Listen! what a noise they are making! Perhaps
you are offended, gentlemen, that I should receive such guests in your
presence? I am very sorry, and ask your forgiveness, but it cannot be
helped--and I should be very grateful if you could all stay and witness
this climax. However, just as you please, of course."

The guests exchanged glances; they were annoyed and bewildered by the
episode; but it was clear enough that all this had been pre-arranged and
expected by Nastasia Philipovna, and that there was no use in trying to
stop her now--for she was little short of insane.

Besides, they were naturally inquisitive to see what was to happen.
There was nobody who would be likely to feel much alarm. There were
but two ladies present; one of whom was the lively actress, who was not
easily frightened, and the other the silent German beauty who, it turned
out, did not understand a word of Russian, and seemed to be as stupid as
she was lovely.

Her acquaintances invited her to their "At Homes" because she was so
decorative. She was exhibited to their guests like a valuable picture,
or vase, or statue, or firescreen. As for the men, Ptitsin was one of
Rogojin's friends; Ferdishenko was as much at home as a fish in the sea,
Gania, not yet recovered from his amazement, appeared to be chained to
a pillory. The old professor did not in the least understand what was
happening; but when he noticed how extremely agitated the mistress of
the house, and her friends, seemed, he nearly wept, and trembled with
fright: but he would rather have died than leave Nastasia Philipovna at
such a crisis, for he loved her as if she were his own granddaughter.
Afanasy Ivanovitch greatly disliked having anything to do with the
affair, but he was too much interested to leave, in spite of the mad
turn things had taken; and a few words that had dropped from the lips
of Nastasia puzzled him so much, that he felt he could not go without
an explanation. He resolved therefore, to see it out, and to adopt the
attitude of silent spectator, as most suited to his dignity. Genera
Epanchin alone determined to depart. He was annoyed at the manner in
which his gift had been returned, an though he had condescended, under
the influence of passion, to place himself on a level with Ptitsin and
Ferdishenko, his self-respect and sense of duty now returned together
with a consciousness of what was due to his social rank and official
importance. In short, he plainly showed his conviction that a man in his
position could have nothing to do with Rogojin and his companions. But
Nastasia interrupted him at his first words.

"Ah, general!" she cried, "I was forgetting! If I had only foreseen
this unpleasantness! I won't insist on keeping you against your will,
although I should have liked you to be beside me now. In any case, I am
most grateful to you for your visit, and flattering attention... but if
you are afraid..."

"Excuse me, Nastasia Philipovna," interrupted the general, with
chivalric generosity. "To whom are you speaking? I have remained until
now simply because of my devotion to you, and as for danger, I am only
afraid that the carpets may be ruined, and the furniture smashed!... You
should shut the door on the lot, in my opinion. But I confess that I am
extremely curious to see how it ends."

"Rogojin!" announced Ferdishenko.

"What do you think about it?" said the general in a low voice to Totski.
"Is she mad? I mean mad in the medical sense of the word .... eh?"

"I've always said she was predisposed to it," whispered Afanasy
Ivanovitch slyly. "Perhaps it is a fever!"

Since their visit to Gania's home, Rogojin's followers had been
increased by two new recruits--a dissolute old man, the hero of some
ancient scandal, and a retired sub-lieutenant. A laughable story was
told of the former. He possessed, it was said, a set of false teeth, and
one day when he wanted money for a drinking orgy, he pawned them, and
was never able to reclaim them! The officer appeared to be a rival of
the gentleman who was so proud of his fists. He was known to none of
Rogojin's followers, but as they passed by the Nevsky, where he stood
begging, he had joined their ranks. His claim for the charity he desired
seemed based on the fact that in the days of his prosperity he had given
away as much as fifteen roubles at a time. The rivals seemed more than
a little jealous of one another. The athlete appeared injured at the
admission of the "beggar" into the company. By nature taciturn, he now
merely growled occasionally like a bear, and glared contemptuously
upon the "beggar," who, being somewhat of a man of the world, and a
diplomatist, tried to insinuate himself into the bear's good graces.
He was a much smaller man than the athlete, and doubtless was conscious
that he must tread warily. Gently and without argument he alluded to
the advantages of the English style in boxing, and showed himself a
firm believer in Western institutions. The athlete's lips curled
disdainfully, and without honouring his adversary with a formal denial,
he exhibited, as if by accident, that peculiarly Russian object--an
enormous fist, clenched, muscular, and covered with red hairs! The sight
of this pre-eminently national attribute was enough to convince anybody,
without words, that it was a serious matter for those who should happen
to come into contact with it.

None of the band were very drunk, for the leader had kept his intended
visit to Nastasia in view all day, and had done his best to prevent
his followers from drinking too much. He was sober himself, but the
excitement of this chaotic day--the strangest day of his life--had
affected him so that he was in a dazed, wild condition, which almost
resembled drunkenness.

He had kept but one idea before him all day, and for that he had worked
in an agony of anxiety and a fever of suspense. His lieutenants had
worked so hard from five o'clock until eleven, that they actually had
collected a hundred thousand roubles for him, but at such terrific
expense, that the rate of interest was only mentioned among them in
whispers and with bated breath.

As before, Rogojin walked in advance of his troop, who followed him with
mingled self-assertion and timidity. They were specially frightened of
Nastasia Philipovna herself, for some reason.

Many of them expected to be thrown downstairs at once, without further
ceremony, the elegant and irresistible Zaleshoff among them. But
the party led by the athlete, without openly showing their hostile
intentions, silently nursed contempt and even hatred for Nastasia
Philipovna, and marched into her house as they would have marched into
an enemy's fortress. Arrived there, the luxury of the rooms seemed to
inspire them with a kind of respect, not unmixed with alarm. So many
things were entirely new to their experience--the choice furniture, the
pictures, the great statue of Venus. They followed their chief into the
salon, however, with a kind of impudent curiosity. There, the sight of
General Epanchin among the guests, caused many of them to beat a hasty
retreat into the adjoining room, the "boxer" and "beggar" being among
the first to go. A few only, of whom Lebedeff made one, stood their
ground; he had contrived to walk side by side with Rogojin, for he quite
understood the importance of a man who had a fortune of a million odd
roubles, and who at this moment carried a hundred thousand in his hand.
It may be added that the whole company, not excepting Lebedeff, had the
vaguest idea of the extent of their powers, and of how far they could
safely go. At some moments Lebedeff was sure that right was on their
side; at others he tried uneasily to remember various cheering and
reassuring articles of the Civil Code.

Rogojin, when he stepped into the room, and his eyes fell upon Nastasia,
stopped short, grew white as a sheet, and stood staring; it was clear
that his heart was beating painfully. So he stood, gazing intently, but
timidly, for a few seconds. Suddenly, as though bereft of his senses, he
moved forward, staggering helplessly, towards the table. On his way he
collided against Ptitsin's chair, and put his dirty foot on the lace
skirt of the silent lady's dress; but he neither apologized for this,
nor even noticed it.

On reaching the table, he placed upon it a strange-looking object, which
he had carried with him into the drawing-room. This was a paper packet,
some six or seven inches thick, and eight or nine in length, wrapped in
an old newspaper, and tied round three or four times with string.

Having placed this before her, he stood with drooped arms and head, as
though awaiting his sentence.

His costume was the same as it had been in the morning, except for a new
silk handkerchief round his neck, bright green and red, fastened with a
huge diamond pin, and an enormous diamond ring on his dirty forefinger.

Lebedeff stood two or three paces behind his chief; and the rest of the
band waited about near the door.

The two maid-servants were both peeping in, frightened and amazed at
this unusual and disorderly scene.

"What is that?" asked Nastasia Philipovna, gazing intently at Rogojin,
and indicating the paper packet.

"A hundred thousand," replied the latter, almost in a whisper.

"Oh! so he kept his word--there's a man for you! Well, sit down,
please--take that chair. I shall have something to say to you presently.
Who are all these with you? The same party? Let them come in and sit
down. There's room on that sofa, there are some chairs and there's
another sofa! Well, why don't they sit down?"

Sure enough, some of the brave fellows entirely lost their heads at this
point, and retreated into the next room. Others, however, took the hint
and sat down, as far as they could from the table, however; feeling
braver in proportion to their distance from Nastasia.

Rogojin took the chair offered him, but he did not sit long; he soon
stood up again, and did not reseat himself. Little by little he began
to look around him and discern the other guests. Seeing Gania, he smiled
venomously and muttered to himself, "Look at that!"

He gazed at Totski and the general with no apparent confusion, and with
very little curiosity. But when he observed that the prince was seated
beside Nastasia Philipovna, he could not take his eyes off him for
a long while, and was clearly amazed. He could not account for the
prince's presence there. It was not in the least surprising that Rogojin
should be, at this time, in a more or less delirious condition; for not
to speak of the excitements of the day, he had spent the night before in
the train, and had not slept more than a wink for forty-eight hours.

"This, gentlemen, is a hundred thousand roubles," said Nastasia
Philipovna, addressing the company in general, "here, in this dirty
parcel. This afternoon Rogojin yelled, like a madman, that he would
bring me a hundred thousand in the evening, and I have been waiting for
him all the while. He was bargaining for me, you know; first he offered
me eighteen thousand; then he rose to forty, and then to a hundred
thousand. And he has kept his word, see! My goodness, how white he is!
All this happened this afternoon, at Gania's. I had gone to pay his
mother a visit--my future family, you know! And his sister said to my
very face, surely somebody will turn this shameless creature out. After
which she spat in her brother Gania's face--a girl of character, that!"

"Nastasia Philipovna!" began the general, reproachfully. He was
beginning to put his own interpretation on the affair.

"Well, what, general? Not quite good form, eh? Oh, nonsense! Here have
I been sitting in my box at the French theatre for the last five years
like a statue of inaccessible virtue, and kept out of the way of all
admirers, like a silly little idiot! Now, there's this man, who comes
and pays down his hundred thousand on the table, before you all, in
spite of my five years of innocence and proud virtue, and I dare be
sworn he has his sledge outside waiting to carry me off. He values me
at a hundred thousand! I see you are still angry with me, Gania!
Why, surely you never really wished to take ME into your family? ME,
Rogojin's mistress! What did the prince say just now?"

"I never said you were Rogojin's mistress--you are NOT!" said the
prince, in trembling accents.

"Nastasia Philipovna, dear soul!" cried the actress, impatiently, "do
be calm, dear! If it annoys you so--all this--do go away and rest! Of
course you would never go with this wretched fellow, in spite of his
hundred thousand roubles! Take his money and kick him out of the house;
that's the way to treat him and the likes of him! Upon my word, if it
were my business, I'd soon clear them all out!"

The actress was a kind-hearted woman, and highly impressionable. She was
very angry now.

"Don't be cross, Daria Alexeyevna!" laughed Nastasia. "I was not angry
when I spoke; I wasn't reproaching Gania. I don't know how it was that I
ever could have indulged the whim of entering an honest family like his.
I saw his mother--and kissed her hand, too. I came and stirred up all
that fuss, Gania, this afternoon, on purpose to see how much you could
swallow--you surprised me, my friend--you did, indeed. Surely you could
not marry a woman who accepts pearls like those you knew the general was
going to give me, on the very eve of her marriage? And Rogojin! Why, in
your own house and before your own brother and sister, he bargained with
me! Yet you could come here and expect to be betrothed to me before you
left the house! You almost brought your sister, too. Surely what Rogojin
said about you is not really true: that you would crawl all the way to
the other end of the town, on hands and knees, for three roubles?"

"Yes, he would!" said Rogojin, quietly, but with an air of absolute
conviction.

"H'm! and he receives a good salary, I'm told. Well, what should you get
but disgrace and misery if you took a wife you hated into your family
(for I know very well that you do hate me)? No, no! I believe now that a
man like you would murder anyone for money--sharpen a razor and come
up behind his best friend and cut his throat like a sheep--I've read
of such people. Everyone seems money-mad nowadays. No, no! I may be
shameless, but you are far worse. I don't say a word about that other--"

"Nastasia Philipovna, is this really you? You, once so refined and
delicate of speech. Oh, what a tongue! What dreadful things you are
saying," cried the general, wringing his hands in real grief.

"I am intoxicated, general. I am having a day out, you know--it's my
birthday! I have long looked forward to this happy occasion. Daria
Alexeyevna, you see that nosegay-man, that Monsieur aux Camelias,
sitting there laughing at us?"

"I am not laughing, Nastasia Philipovna; I am only listening with all my
attention," said Totski, with dignity.

"Well, why have I worried him, for five years, and never let him go
free? Is he worth it? He is only just what he ought to be--nothing
particular. He thinks I am to blame, too. He gave me my education, kept
me like a countess. Money--my word! What a lot of money he spent over
me! And he tried to find me an honest husband first, and then this
Gania, here. And what do you think? All these five years I did not
live with him, and yet I took his money, and considered I was quite
justified.

"You say, take the hundred thousand and kick that man out. It is true,
it is an abominable business, as you say. I might have married long ago,
not Gania--Oh, no!--but that would have been abominable too.

"Would you believe it, I had some thoughts of marrying Totski, four
years ago! I meant mischief, I confess--but I could have had him, I give
you my word; he asked me himself. But I thought, no! it's not worthwhile
to take such advantage of him. No! I had better go on to the streets, or
accept Rogojin, or become a washerwoman or something--for I have nothing
of my own, you know. I shall go away and leave everything behind, to
the last rag--he shall have it all back. And who would take me without
anything? Ask Gania, there, whether he would. Why, even Ferdishenko
wouldn't have me!"

"No, Ferdishenko would not; he is a candid fellow, Nastasia Philipovna,"
said that worthy. "But the prince would. You sit here making complaints,
but just look at the prince. I've been observing him for a long while."

Nastasia Philipovna looked keenly round at the prince.

"Is that true?" she asked.

"Quite true," whispered the prince.

"You'll take me as I am, with nothing?"

"I will, Nastasia Philipovna."

"Here's a pretty business!" cried the general. "However, it might have
been expected of him."

The prince continued to regard Nastasia with a sorrowful, but intent and
piercing, gaze.

"Here's another alternative for me," said Nastasia, turning once more to
the actress; "and he does it out of pure kindness of heart. I know him.
I've found a benefactor. Perhaps, though, what they say about him may be
true--that he's an--we know what. And what shall you live on, if you are
really so madly in love with Rogojin's mistress, that you are ready to
marry her--eh?"

"I take you as a good, honest woman, Nastasia Philipovna--not as
Rogojin's mistress."

"Who? I?--good and honest?"

"Yes, you."

"Oh, you get those ideas out of novels, you know. Times are changed
now, dear prince; the world sees things as they really are. That's all
nonsense. Besides, how can you marry? You need a nurse, not a wife."

The prince rose and began to speak in a trembling, timid tone, but with
the air of a man absolutely sure of the truth of his words.

"I know nothing, Nastasia Philipovna. I have seen nothing. You are right
