so far; but I consider that you would be honouring me, and not I you. I
am a nobody. You have suffered, you have passed through hell and emerged
pure, and that is very much. Why do you shame yourself by desiring to
go with Rogojin? You are delirious. You have returned to Mr. Totski his
seventy-five thousand roubles, and declared that you will leave this
house and all that is in it, which is a line of conduct that not one
person here would imitate. Nastasia Philipovna, I love you! I would die
for you. I shall never let any man say one word against you, Nastasia
Philipovna! and if we are poor, I can work for both."

As the prince spoke these last words a titter was heard from
Ferdishenko; Lebedeff laughed too. The general grunted with irritation;
Ptitsin and Totski barely restrained their smiles. The rest all sat
listening, open-mouthed with wonder.

"But perhaps we shall not be poor; we may be very rich, Nastasia
Philipovna." continued the prince, in the same timid, quivering tones.
"I don't know for certain, and I'm sorry to say I haven't had an
opportunity of finding out all day; but I received a letter from Moscow,
while I was in Switzerland, from a Mr. Salaskin, and he acquaints me
with the fact that I am entitled to a very large inheritance. This
letter--"

The prince pulled a letter out of his pocket.

"Is he raving?" said the general. "Are we really in a mad-house?"

There was silence for a moment. Then Ptitsin spoke.

"I think you said, prince, that your letter was from Salaskin? Salaskin
is a very eminent man, indeed, in his own world; he is a wonderfully
clever solicitor, and if he really tells you this, I think you may be
pretty sure that he is right. It so happens, luckily, that I know his
handwriting, for I have lately had business with him. If you would allow
me to see it, I should perhaps be able to tell you."

The prince held out the letter silently, but with a shaking hand.

"What, what?" said the general, much agitated.

"What's all this? Is he really heir to anything?"

All present concentrated their attention upon Ptitsin, reading the
prince's letter. The general curiosity had received a new fillip.
Ferdishenko could not sit still. Rogojin fixed his eyes first on the
prince, and then on Ptitsin, and then back again; he was extremely
agitated. Lebedeff could not stand it. He crept up and read over
Ptitsin's shoulder, with the air of a naughty boy who expects a box on
the ear every moment for his indiscretion.

XVI.

"It's good business," said Ptitsin, at last, folding the letter and
handing it back to the prince. "You will receive, without the slightest
trouble, by the last will and testament of your aunt, a very large sum
of money indeed."

"Impossible!" cried the general, starting up as if he had been shot.

Ptitsin explained, for the benefit of the company, that the prince's
aunt had died five months since. He had never known her, but she was his
mother's own sister, the daughter of a Moscow merchant, one Paparchin,
who had died a bankrupt. But the elder brother of this same Paparchin,
had been an eminent and very rich merchant. A year since it had so
happened that his only two sons had both died within the same month.
This sad event had so affected the old man that he, too, had died very
shortly after. He was a widower, and had no relations left, excepting
the prince's aunt, a poor woman living on charity, who was herself at
the point of death from dropsy; but who had time, before she died,
to set Salaskin to work to find her nephew, and to make her will
bequeathing her newly-acquired fortune to him.

It appeared that neither the prince, nor the doctor with whom he lived
in Switzerland, had thought of waiting for further communications;
but the prince had started straight away with Salaskin's letter in his
pocket.

"One thing I may tell you, for certain," concluded Ptitsin, addressing
the prince, "that there is no question about the authenticity of this
matter. Anything that Salaskin writes you as regards your unquestionable
right to this inheritance, you may look upon as so much money in your
pocket. I congratulate you, prince; you may receive a million and a half
of roubles, perhaps more; I don't know. All I DO know is that Paparchin
was a very rich merchant indeed."

"Hurrah!" cried Lebedeff, in a drunken voice. "Hurrah for the last of
the Muishkins!"

"My goodness me! and I gave him twenty-five roubles this morning as
though he were a beggar," blurted out the general, half senseless with
amazement. "Well, I congratulate you, I congratulate you!" And the
general rose from his seat and solemnly embraced the prince. All came
forward with congratulations; even those of Rogojin's party who had
retreated into the next room, now crept softly back to look on. For the
moment even Nastasia Philipovna was forgotten.

But gradually the consciousness crept back into the minds of each one
present that the prince had just made her an offer of marriage. The
situation had, therefore, become three times as fantastic as before.

Totski sat and shrugged his shoulders, bewildered. He was the only guest
left sitting at this time; the others had thronged round the table in
disorder, and were all talking at once.

It was generally agreed, afterwards, in recalling that evening, that
from this moment Nastasia Philipovna seemed entirely to lose her senses.
She continued to sit still in her place, looking around at her guests
with a strange, bewildered expression, as though she were trying to
collect her thoughts, and could not. Then she suddenly turned to the
prince, and glared at him with frowning brows; but this only lasted one
moment. Perhaps it suddenly struck her that all this was a jest, but his
face seemed to reassure her. She reflected, and smiled again, vaguely.

"So I am really a princess," she whispered to herself, ironically,
and glancing accidentally at Daria Alexeyevna's face, she burst out
laughing.

"Ha, ha, ha!" she cried, "this is an unexpected climax, after all. I
didn't expect this. What are you all standing up for, gentlemen? Sit
down; congratulate me and the prince! Ferdishenko, just step out and
order some more champagne, will you? Katia, Pasha," she added suddenly,
seeing the servants at the door, "come here! I'm going to be married,
did you hear? To the prince. He has a million and a half of roubles; he
is Prince Muishkin, and has asked me to marry him. Here, prince, come
and sit by me; and here comes the wine. Now then, ladies and gentlemen,
where are your congratulations?"

"Hurrah!" cried a number of voices. A rush was made for the wine by
Rogojin's followers, though, even among them, there seemed some sort of
realization that the situation had changed. Rogojin stood and looked on,
with an incredulous smile, screwing up one side of his mouth.

"Prince, my dear fellow, do remember what you are about," said the
general, approaching Muishkin, and pulling him by the coat sleeve.

Nastasia Philipovna overheard the remark, and burst out laughing.

"No, no, general!" she cried. "You had better look out! I am the
princess now, you know. The prince won't let you insult me. Afanasy
Ivanovitch, why don't you congratulate me? I shall be able to sit at
table with your new wife, now. Aha! you see what I gain by marrying
a prince! A million and a half, and a prince, and an idiot into the
bargain, they say. What better could I wish for? Life is only just about
to commence for me in earnest. Rogojin, you are a little too late. Away
with your paper parcel! I'm going to marry the prince; I'm richer than
you are now."

But Rogojin understood how things were tending, at last. An
inexpressibly painful expression came over his face. He wrung his hands;
a groan made its way up from the depths of his soul.

"Surrender her, for God's sake!" he said to the prince.

All around burst out laughing.

"What? Surrender her to YOU?" cried Daria Alexeyevna. "To a fellow who
comes and bargains for a wife like a moujik! The prince wishes to marry
her, and you--"

"So do I, so do I! This moment, if I could! I'd give every farthing I
have to do it."

"You drunken moujik," said Daria Alexeyevna, once more. "You ought to be
kicked out of the place."

The laughter became louder than ever.

"Do you hear, prince?" said Nastasia Philipovna. "Do you hear how this
moujik of a fellow goes on bargaining for your bride?"

"He is drunk," said the prince, quietly, "and he loves you very much."

"Won't you be ashamed, afterwards, to reflect that your wife very nearly
ran away with Rogojin?"

"Oh, you were raving, you were in a fever; you are still half
delirious."

"And won't you be ashamed when they tell you, afterwards, that your wife
lived at Totski's expense so many years?"

"No; I shall not be ashamed of that. You did not so live by your own
will."

"And you'll never reproach me with it?"

"Never."

"Take care, don't commit yourself for a whole lifetime."

"Nastasia Philipovna." said the prince, quietly, and with deep emotion,
"I said before that I shall esteem your consent to be my wife as a great
honour to myself, and shall consider that it is you who will honour
me, not I you, by our marriage. You laughed at these words, and others
around us laughed as well; I heard them. Very likely I expressed myself
funnily, and I may have looked funny, but, for all that, I believe I
understand where honour lies, and what I said was but the literal truth.
You were about to ruin yourself just now, irrevocably; you would
never have forgiven yourself for so doing afterwards; and yet, you
are absolutely blameless. It is impossible that your life should be
altogether ruined at your age. What matter that Rogojin came bargaining
here, and that Gavrila Ardalionovitch would have deceived you if he
could? Why do you continually remind us of these facts? I assure you
once more that very few could find it in them to act as you have acted
this day. As for your wish to go with Rogojin, that was simply the idea
of a delirious and suffering brain. You are still quite feverish; you
ought to be in bed, not here. You know quite well that if you had gone
with Rogojin, you would have become a washer-woman next day, rather than
stay with him. You are proud, Nastasia Philipovna, and perhaps you have
really suffered so much that you imagine yourself to be a desperately
guilty woman. You require a great deal of petting and looking after,
Nastasia Philipovna, and I will do this. I saw your portrait this
morning, and it seemed quite a familiar face to me; it seemed to me that
the portrait-face was calling to me for help. I-I shall respect you all
my life, Nastasia Philipovna," concluded the prince, as though suddenly
recollecting himself, and blushing to think of the sort of company
before whom he had said all this.

Ptitsin bowed his head and looked at the ground, overcome by a mixture
of feelings. Totski muttered to himself: "He may be an idiot, but he
knows that flattery is the best road to success here."

The prince observed Gania's eyes flashing at him, as though they would
gladly annihilate him then and there.

"That's a kind-hearted man, if you like," said Daria Alexeyevna, whose
wrath was quickly evaporating.

"A refined man, but--lost," murmured the general.

Totski took his hat and rose to go. He and the general exchanged
glances, making a private arrangement, thereby, to leave the house
together.

"Thank you, prince; no one has ever spoken to me like that before,"
began Nastasia Philipovna. "Men have always bargained for me, before
this; and not a single respectable man has ever proposed to marry me. Do
you hear, Afanasy Ivanovitch? What do YOU think of what the prince has
just been saying? It was almost immodest, wasn't it? You, Rogojin, wait
a moment, don't go yet! I see you don't intend to move however. Perhaps
I may go with you yet. Where did you mean to take me to?"

"To Ekaterinhof," replied Lebedeff. Rogojin simply stood staring, with
trembling lips, not daring to believe his ears. He was stunned, as
though from a blow on the head.

"What are you thinking of, my dear Nastasia?" said Daria Alexeyevna in
alarm. "What are you saying?" "You are not going mad, are you?"

Nastasia Philipovna burst out laughing and jumped up from the sofa.

"You thought I should accept this good child's invitation to ruin
him, did you?" she cried. "That's Totski's way, not mine. He's fond of
children. Come along, Rogojin, get your money ready! We won't talk about
marrying just at this moment, but let's see the money at all events.
Come! I may not marry you, either. I don't know. I suppose you thought
you'd keep the money, if I did! Ha, ha, ha! nonsense! I have no sense of
shame left. I tell you I have been Totski's concubine. Prince, you
must marry Aglaya Ivanovna, not Nastasia Philipovna, or this fellow
Ferdishenko will always be pointing the finger of scorn at you. You
aren't afraid, I know; but I should always be afraid that I had ruined
you, and that you would reproach me for it. As for what you say about
my doing you honour by marrying you-well, Totski can tell you all about
that. You had your eye on Aglaya, Gania, you know you had; and you might
have married her if you had not come bargaining. You are all like
this. You should choose, once for all, between disreputable women, and
respectable ones, or you are sure to get mixed. Look at the general, how
he's staring at me!"

"This is too horrible," said the general, starting to his feet. All were
standing up now. Nastasia was absolutely beside herself.

"I am very proud, in spite of what I am," she continued. "You called me
'perfection' just now, prince. A nice sort of perfection to throw up a
prince and a million and a half of roubles in order to be able to boast
of the fact afterwards! What sort of a wife should I make for you, after
all I have said? Afanasy Ivanovitch, do you observe I have really and
truly thrown away a million of roubles? And you thought that I should
consider your wretched seventy-five thousand, with Gania thrown in for a
husband, a paradise of bliss! Take your seventy-five thousand back, sir;
you did not reach the hundred thousand. Rogojin cut a better dash than
you did. I'll console Gania myself; I have an idea about that. But now I
must be off! I've been in prison for ten years. I'm free at last! Well,
Rogojin, what are you waiting for? Let's get ready and go."

"Come along!" shouted Rogojin, beside himself with joy. "Hey! all of you
fellows! Wine! Round with it! Fill the glasses!"

"Get away!" he shouted frantically, observing that Daria Alexeyevna
was approaching to protest against Nastasia's conduct. "Get away, she's
mine, everything's mine! She's a queen, get away!"

He was panting with ecstasy. He walked round and round Nastasia
Philipovna and told everybody to "keep their distance."

All the Rogojin company were now collected in the drawing-room; some
were drinking, some laughed and talked: all were in the highest and
wildest spirits. Ferdishenko was doing his best to unite himself to
them; the general and Totski again made an attempt to go. Gania, too
stood hat in hand ready to go; but seemed to be unable to tear his eyes
away from the scene before him.

"Get out, keep your distance!" shouted Rogojin.

"What are you shouting about there!" cried Nastasia "I'm not yours yet.
I may kick you out for all you know I haven't taken your money yet;
there it all is on the table Here, give me over that packet! Is there a
hundred thousand roubles in that one packet? Pfu! what abominable stuff
it looks! Oh! nonsense, Daria Alexeyevna; you surely did not expect me
to ruin HIM?" (indicating the prince). "Fancy him nursing me! Why, he
needs a nurse himself! The general, there, will be his nurse now, you'll
see. Here, prince, look here! Your bride is accepting money. What a
disreputable woman she must be! And you wished to marry her! What are
you crying about? Is it a bitter dose? Never mind, you shall laugh yet.
Trust to time." (In spite of these words there were two large tears
rolling down Nastasia's own cheeks.) "It's far better to think twice
of it now than afterwards. Oh! you mustn't cry like that! There's Katia
crying, too. What is it, Katia, dear? I shall leave you and Pasha a lot
of things, I've laid them out for you already; but good-bye, now. I made
an honest girl like you serve a low woman like myself. It's better so,
prince, it is indeed. You'd begin to despise me afterwards--we should
never be happy. Oh! you needn't swear, prince, I shan't believe you, you
know. How foolish it would be, too! No, no; we'd better say good-bye and
part friends. I am a bit of a dreamer myself, and I used to dream of you
once. Very often during those five years down at his estate I used to
dream and think, and I always imagined just such a good, honest, foolish
fellow as you, one who should come and say to me: 'You are an innocent
woman, Nastasia Philipovna, and I adore you.' I dreamt of you often. I
used to think so much down there that I nearly went mad; and then this
fellow here would come down. He would stay a couple of months out of the
twelve, and disgrace and insult and deprave me, and then go; so that I
longed to drown myself in the pond a thousand times over; but I did not
dare do it. I hadn't the heart, and now--well, are you ready, Rogojin?"

"Ready--keep your distance, all of you!"

"We're all ready," said several of his friends. "The troikas [Sledges
drawn by three horses abreast.] are at the door, bells and all."

Nastasia Philipovna seized the packet of bank-notes.

"Gania, I have an idea. I wish to recompense you--why should you
lose all? Rogojin, would he crawl for three roubles as far as the
Vassiliostrof?

"Oh, wouldn't he just!"

"Well, look here, Gania. I wish to look into your heart once more, for
the last time. You've worried me for the last three months--now it's my
turn. Do you see this packet? It contains a hundred thousand roubles.
Now, I'm going to throw it into the fire, here--before all these
witnesses. As soon as the fire catches hold of it, you put your hands
into the fire and pick it out--without gloves, you know. You must have
bare hands, and you must turn your sleeves up. Pull it out, I say, and
it's all yours. You may burn your fingers a little, of course; but then
it's a hundred thousand roubles, remember--it won't take you long to lay
hold of it and snatch it out. I shall so much admire you if you put your
hands into the fire for my money. All here present may be witnesses that
the whole packet of money is yours if you get it out. If you don't get
it out, it shall burn. I will let no one else come; away--get away, all
of you--it's my money! Rogojin has bought me with it. Is it my money,
Rogojin?"

"Yes, my queen; it's your own money, my joy."

"Get away then, all of you. I shall do as I like with my own--don't
meddle! Ferdishenko, make up the fire, quick!"

"Nastasia Philipovna, I can't; my hands won't obey me," said
Ferdishenko, astounded and helpless with bewilderment.

"Nonsense," cried Nastasia Philipovna, seizing the poker and raking a
couple of logs together. No sooner did a tongue of flame burst out than
she threw the packet of notes upon it.

Everyone gasped; some even crossed themselves.

"She's mad--she's mad!" was the cry.

"Oughtn't-oughtn't we to secure her?" asked the general of Ptitsin, in
a whisper; "or shall we send for the authorities? Why, she's mad, isn't
she--isn't she, eh?"

"N-no, I hardly think she is actually mad," whispered Ptitsin, who was
as white as his handkerchief, and trembling like a leaf. He could not
take his eyes off the smouldering packet.

"She's mad surely, isn't she?" the general appealed to Totski.

"I told you she wasn't an ordinary woman," replied the latter, who was
as pale as anyone.

"Oh, but, positively, you know--a hundred thousand roubles!"

"Goodness gracious! good heavens!" came from all quarters of the room.

All now crowded round the fire and thronged to see what was going on;
everyone lamented and gave vent to exclamations of horror and woe. Some
jumped up on chairs in order to get a better view. Daria Alexeyevna
ran into the next room and whispered excitedly to Katia and Pasha. The
beautiful German disappeared altogether.

"My lady! my sovereign!" lamented Lebedeff, falling on his knees before
Nastasia Philipovna, and stretching out his hands towards the fire;
"it's a hundred thousand roubles, it is indeed, I packed it up myself,
I saw the money! My queen, let me get into the fire after it--say the
word-I'll put my whole grey head into the fire for it! I have a poor
lame wife and thirteen children. My father died of starvation last week.
Nastasia Philipovna, Nastasia Philipovna!" The wretched little man wept,
and groaned, and crawled towards the fire.

"Away, out of the way!" cried Nastasia. "Make room, all of you! Gania,
what are you standing there for? Don't stand on ceremony. Put in your
hand! There's your whole happiness smouldering away, look! Quick!"

But Gania had borne too much that day, and especially this evening, and
he was not prepared for this last, quite unexpected trial.

The crowd parted on each side of him and he was left face to face with
Nastasia Philipovna, three paces from her. She stood by the fire and
waited, with her intent gaze fixed upon him.

Gania stood before her, in his evening clothes, holding his white gloves
and hat in his hand, speechless and motionless, with arms folded and
eyes fixed on the fire.

A silly, meaningless smile played on his white, death-like lips. He
could not take his eyes off the smouldering packet; but it appeared that
something new had come to birth in his soul--as though he were vowing to
himself that he would bear this trial. He did not move from his place.
In a few seconds it became evident to all that he did not intend to
rescue the money.

"Hey! look at it, it'll burn in another minute or two!" cried Nastasia
Philipovna. "You'll hang yourself afterwards, you know, if it does! I'm
not joking."

The fire, choked between a couple of smouldering pieces of wood, had
died down for the first few moments after the packet was thrown upon it.
But a little tongue of fire now began to lick the paper from below,
and soon, gathering courage, mounted the sides of the parcel, and crept
around it. In another moment, the whole of it burst into flames, and the
exclamations of woe and horror were redoubled.

"Nastasia Philipovna!" lamented Lebedeff again, straining towards the
fireplace; but Rogojin dragged him away, and pushed him to the rear once
more.

The whole of Regojin's being was concentrated in one rapturous gaze of
ecstasy. He could not take his eyes off Nastasia. He stood drinking her
in, as it were. He was in the seventh heaven of delight.

"Oh, what a queen she is!" he ejaculated, every other minute, throwing
out the remark for anyone who liked to catch it. "That's the sort of
woman for me! Which of you would think of doing a thing like that, you
blackguards, eh?" he yelled. He was hopelessly and wildly beside himself
with ecstasy.

The prince watched the whole scene, silent and dejected.

"I'll pull it out with my teeth for one thousand," said Ferdishenko.

"So would I," said another, from behind, "with pleasure. Devil take the
thing!" he added, in a tempest of despair, "it will all be burnt up in a
minute--It's burning, it's burning!"

"It's burning, it's burning!" cried all, thronging nearer and nearer to
the fire in their excitement.

"Gania, don't be a fool! I tell you for the last time."

"Get on, quick!" shrieked Ferdishenko, rushing wildly up to Gania, and
trying to drag him to the fire by the sleeve of his coat. "Get it, you
dummy, it's burning away fast! Oh--DAMN the thing!"

Gania hurled Ferdishenko from him; then he turned sharp round and made
for the door. But he had not gone a couple of steps when he tottered and
fell to the ground.

"He's fainted!" the cry went round.

"And the money's burning still," Lebedeff lamented.

"Burning for nothing," shouted others.

"Katia-Pasha! Bring him some water!" cried Nastasia Philipovna. Then she
took the tongs and fished out the packet.

Nearly the whole of the outer covering was burned away, but it was
soon evident that the contents were hardly touched. The packet had been
wrapped in a threefold covering of newspaper, and the notes were safe.
All breathed more freely.

"Some dirty little thousand or so may be touched," said Lebedeff,
immensely relieved, "but there's very little harm done, after all."

"It's all his--the whole packet is for him, do you hear--all of you?"
cried Nastasia Philipovna, placing the packet by the side of Gania.
"He restrained himself, and didn't go after it; so his self-respect is
greater than his thirst for money. All right--he'll come to directly--he
must have the packet or he'll cut his throat afterwards. There! He's
coming to himself. General, Totski, all of you, did you hear me? The
money is all Gania's. I give it to him, fully conscious of my action, as
recompense for--well, for anything he thinks best. Tell him so. Let it
lie here beside him. Off we go, Rogojin! Goodbye, prince. I have seen
a man for the first time in my life. Goodbye, Afanasy Ivanovitch--and
thanks!"

The Rogojin gang followed their leader and Nastasia Philipovna to the
entrance-hall, laughing and shouting and whistling.

In the hall the servants were waiting, and handed her her fur cloak.
Martha, the cook, ran in from the kitchen. Nastasia kissed them all
round.

"Are you really throwing us all over, little mother? Where, where are
you going to? And on your birthday, too!" cried the four girls, crying
over her and kissing her hands.

"I am going out into the world, Katia; perhaps I shall be a laundress. I
don't know. No more of Afanasy Ivanovitch, anyhow. Give him my respects.
Don't think badly of me, girls."

The prince hurried down to the front gate where the party were settling
into the troikas, all the bells tinkling a merry accompaniment the
while. The general caught him up on the stairs:

"Prince, prince!" he cried, seizing hold of his arm, "recollect
yourself! Drop her, prince! You see what sort of a woman she is. I am
speaking to you like a father."

The prince glanced at him, but said nothing. He shook himself free, and
rushed on downstairs.

The general was just in time to see the prince take the first sledge he
could get, and, giving the order to Ekaterinhof, start off in pursuit
of the troikas. Then the general's fine grey horse dragged that worthy
home, with some new thoughts, and some new hopes and calculations
developing in his brain, and with the pearls in his pocket, for he had
not forgotten to bring them along with him, being a man of business.
Amid his new thoughts and ideas there came, once or twice, the image of
Nastasia Philipovna. The general sighed.

"I'm sorry, really sorry," he muttered. "She's a ruined woman. Mad! mad!
However, the prince is not for Nastasia Philipovna now,--perhaps it's as
well."

Two more of Nastasia's guests, who walked a short distance together,
indulged in high moral sentiments of a similar nature.

"Do you know, Totski, this is all very like what they say goes on
among the Japanese?" said Ptitsin. "The offended party there, they say,
marches off to his insulter and says to him, 'You insulted me, so I have
come to rip myself open before your eyes;' and with these words he
does actually rip his stomach open before his enemy, and considers,
doubtless, that he is having all possible and necessary satisfaction and
revenge. There are strange characters in the world, sir!"

"H'm! and you think there was something of this sort here, do you? Dear
me--a very remarkable comparison, you know! But you must have observed,
my dear Ptitsin, that I did all I possibly could. I could do no more
than I did. And you must admit that there are some rare qualities in
this woman. I felt I could not speak in that Bedlam, or I should have
been tempted to cry out, when she reproached me, that she herself was
my best justification. Such a woman could make anyone forget all
reason--everything! Even that moujik, Rogojin, you saw, brought her
a hundred thousand roubles! Of course, all that happened tonight
was ephemeral, fantastic, unseemly--yet it lacked neither colour nor
originality. My God! What might not have been made of such a character
combined with such beauty! Yet in spite of all efforts--in spite of all
education, even--all those gifts are wasted! She is an uncut diamond....
I have often said so."

And Afanasy Ivanovitch heaved a deep sigh.




PART II

I.

Two days after the strange conclusion to Nastasia Philipovna's birthday
party, with the record of which we concluded the first part of this
story, Prince Muishkin hurriedly left St. Petersburg for Moscow, in
order to see after some business connected with the receipt of his
unexpected fortune.

It was said that there were other reasons for his hurried departure; but
as to this, and as to his movements in Moscow, and as to his
prolonged absence from St. Petersburg, we are able to give very little
information.

The prince was away for six months, and even those who were most
interested in his destiny were able to pick up very little news about
him all that while. True, certain rumours did reach his friends, but
these were both strange and rare, and each one contradicted the last.

Of course the Epanchin family was much interested in his movements,
though he had not had time to bid them farewell before his departure.
The general, however, had had an opportunity of seeing him once or twice
since the eventful evening, and had spoken very seriously with him;
but though he had seen the prince, as I say, he told his family nothing
about the circumstance. In fact, for a month or so after his departure
it was considered not the thing to mention the prince's name in the
Epanchin household. Only Mrs. Epanchin, at the commencement of this
period, had announced that she had been "cruelly mistaken in the
prince!" and a day or two after, she had added, evidently alluding
to him, but not mentioning his name, that it was an unalterable
characteristic of hers to be mistaken in people. Then once more, ten
days later, after some passage of arms with one of her daughters, she
had remarked sententiously. "We have had enough of mistakes. I shall be
more careful in future!" However, it was impossible to avoid remarking
that there was some sense of oppression in the household--something
unspoken, but felt; something strained. All the members of the family
wore frowning looks. The general was unusually busy; his family hardly
ever saw him.

As to the girls, nothing was said openly, at all events; and probably
very little in private. They were proud damsels, and were not always
perfectly confidential even among themselves. But they understood each
other thoroughly at the first word on all occasions; very often at the
first glance, so that there was no need of much talking as a rule.

One fact, at least, would have been perfectly plain to an outsider, had
any such person been on the spot; and that was, that the prince had made
a very considerable impression upon the family, in spite of the fact
that he had but once been inside the house, and then only for a short
time. Of course, if analyzed, this impression might have proved to be
nothing more than a feeling of curiosity; but be it what it might, there
it undoubtedly was.

Little by little, the rumours spread about town became lost in a maze of
uncertainty. It was said that some foolish young prince, name unknown,
had suddenly come into possession of a gigantic fortune, and had married
a French ballet dancer. This was contradicted, and the rumour circulated
that it was a young merchant who had come into the enormous fortune and
married the great ballet dancer, and that at the wedding the drunken
young fool had burned seventy thousand roubles at a candle out of pure
bravado.

However, all these rumours soon died down, to which circumstance certain
facts largely contributed. For instance, the whole of the Rogojin troop
had departed, with him at their head, for Moscow. This was exactly a
week after a dreadful orgy at the Ekaterinhof gardens, where Nastasia
Philipovna had been present. It became known that after this orgy
Nastasia Philipovna had entirely disappeared, and that she had since
been traced to Moscow; so that the exodus of the Rogojin band was found
consistent with this report.

There were rumours current as to Gania, too; but circumstances soon
contradicted these. He had fallen seriously ill, and his illness
precluded his appearance in society, and even at business, for over a
month. As soon as he had recovered, however, he threw up his situation
in the public company under General Epanchin's direction, for some
unknown reason, and the post was given to another. He never went
near the Epanchins' house at all, and was exceedingly irritable and
depressed.

Varvara Ardalionovna married Ptitsin this winter, and it was said that
the fact of Gania's retirement from business was the ultimate cause of
the marriage, since Gania was now not only unable to support his family,
but even required help himself.

We may mention that Gania was no longer mentioned in the Epanchin
household any more than the prince was; but that a certain circumstance
in connection with the fatal evening at Nastasia's house became known
to the general, and, in fact, to all the family the very next day. This
fact was that Gania had come home that night, but had refused to go to
bed. He had awaited the prince's return from Ekaterinhof with feverish
impatience.

On the latter's arrival, at six in the morning, Gania had gone to him
in his room, bringing with him the singed packet of money, which he had
insisted that the prince should return to Nastasia Philipovna without
delay. It was said that when Gania entered the prince's room, he came
with anything but friendly feelings, and in a condition of despair and
misery; but that after a short conversation, he had stayed on for a
couple of hours with him, sobbing continuously and bitterly the whole
time. They had parted upon terms of cordial friendship.

The Epanchins heard about this, as well as about the episode at Nastasia
Philipovna's. It was strange, perhaps, that the facts should become so
quickly, and fairly accurately, known. As far as Gania was concerned,
it might have been supposed that the news had come through Varvara
Ardalionovna, who had suddenly become a frequent visitor of the Epanchin
girls, greatly to their mother's surprise. But though Varvara had seen
fit, for some reason, to make friends with them, it was not likely
that she would have talked to them about her brother. She had plenty of
pride, in spite of the fact that in thus acting she was seeking intimacy
with people who had practically shown her brother the door. She and the
Epanchin girls had been acquainted in childhood, although of late
they had met but rarely. Even now Varvara hardly ever appeared in the
drawing-room, but would slip in by a back way. Lizabetha Prokofievna,
who disliked Varvara, although she had a great respect for her mother,
was much annoyed by this sudden intimacy, and put it down to the general
"contrariness" of her daughters, who were "always on the lookout for
some new way of opposing her." Nevertheless, Varvara continued her
visits.

A month after Muishkin's departure, Mrs. Epanchin received a letter from
her old friend Princess Bielokonski (who had lately left for Moscow),
which letter put her into the greatest good humour. She did not divulge
its contents either to her daughters or the general, but her conduct
towards the former became affectionate in the extreme. She even made
some sort of confession to them, but they were unable to understand what
it was about. She actually relaxed towards the general a little--he had
been long disgraced--and though she managed to quarrel with them all the
next day, yet she soon came round, and from her general behaviour it was
to be concluded that she had bad good news of some sort, which she would
like, but could not make up her mind, to disclose.

However, a week later she received another letter from the same source,
and at last resolved to speak.

She solemnly announced that she had heard from old Princess Bielokonski,
who had given her most comforting news about "that queer young prince."
Her friend had hunted him up, and found that all was going well with
him. He had since called in person upon her, making an extremely
favourable impression, for the princess had received him each day since,
and had introduced him into several good houses.

The girls could see that their mother concealed a great deal from them,
and left out large pieces of the letter in reading it to them.

However, the ice was broken, and it suddenly became possible to mention
the prince's name again. And again it became evident how very strong was
the impression the young man had made in the household by his one visit
there. Mrs. Epanchin was surprised at the effect which the news from
Moscow had upon the girls, and they were no less surprised that after
solemnly remarking that her most striking characteristic was "being
mistaken in people" she should have troubled to obtain for the prince
the favour and protection of so powerful an old lady as the Princess
Bielokonski. As soon as the ice was thus broken, the general lost no
time in showing that he, too, took the greatest interest in the subject.
He admitted that he was interested, but said that it was merely in the
business side of the question. It appeared that, in the interests of
the prince, he had made arrangements in Moscow for a careful watch to be
kept upon the prince's business affairs, and especially upon Salaskin.
All that had been said as to the prince being an undoubted heir to a
fortune turned out to be perfectly true; but the fortune proved to be
much smaller than was at first reported. The estate was considerably
encumbered with debts; creditors turned up on all sides, and the prince,
in spite of all advice and entreaty, insisted upon managing all matters
of claim himself--which, of course, meant satisfying everybody all
round, although half the claims were absolutely fraudulent.

Mrs. Epanchin confirmed all this. She said the princess had written to
much the same effect, and added that there was no curing a fool. But
it was plain, from her expression of face, how strongly she approved of
this particular young fool's doings. In conclusion, the general observed
that his wife took as great an interest in the prince as though he were
her own son; and that she had commenced to be especially affectionate
towards Aglaya was a self-evident fact.

All this caused the general to look grave and important. But, alas! this
agreeable state of affairs very soon changed once more.

A couple of weeks went by, and suddenly the general and his wife were
once more gloomy and silent, and the ice was as firm as ever. The fact
was, the general, who had heard first, how Nastasia Philipovna had fled
to Moscow and had been discovered there by Rogojin; that she had then
disappeared once more, and been found again by Rogojin, and how after
that she had almost promised to marry him, now received news that she
had once more disappeared, almost on the very day fixed for her wedding,
flying somewhere into the interior of Russia this time, and that
Prince Muishkin had left all his affairs in the hands of Salaskin and
disappeared also--but whether he was with Nastasia, or had only set off
in search of her, was unknown.

Lizabetha Prokofievna received confirmatory news from the princess--and
alas, two months after the prince's first departure from St. Petersburg,
darkness and mystery once more enveloped his whereabouts and actions,
and in the Epanchin family the ice of silence once more formed over the
subject. Varia, however, informed the girls of what had happened, she
having received the news from Ptitsin, who generally knew more than most
people.

To make an end, we may say that there were many changes in the Epanchin
household in the spring, so that it was not difficult to forget the
prince, who sent no news of himself.

The Epanchin family had at last made up their minds to spend the summer
abroad, all except the general, who could not waste time in "travelling
for enjoyment," of course. This arrangement was brought about by the
persistence of the girls, who insisted that they were never allowed
to go abroad because their parents were too anxious to marry them off.
Perhaps their parents had at last come to the conclusion that husbands
might be found abroad, and that a summer's travel might bear fruit. The
marriage between Alexandra and Totski had been broken off. Since the
prince's departure from St. Petersburg no more had been said about it;
the subject had been dropped without ceremony, much to the joy of Mrs.
General, who, announced that she was "ready to cross herself with both
hands" in gratitude for the escape. The general, however, regretted
Totski for a long while. "Such a fortune!" he sighed, "and such a good,
easy-going fellow!"

After a time it became known that Totski had married a French marquise,
and was to be carried off by her to Paris, and then to Brittany.

"Oh, well," thought the general, "he's lost to us for good, now."

So the Epanchins prepared to depart for the summer.

But now another circumstance occurred, which changed all the plans once
more, and again the intended journey was put off, much to the delight of
the general and his spouse.

A certain Prince S---- arrived in St. Petersburg from Moscow, an eminent
and honourable young man. He was one of those active persons who always
find some good work with which to employ themselves. Without forcing
himself upon the public notice, modest and unobtrusive, this young
prince was concerned with much that happened in the world in general.

He had served, at first, in one of the civil departments, had then
attended to matters connected with the local government of provincial
towns, and had of late been a corresponding member of several important
scientific societies. He was a man of excellent family and solid means,
about thirty-five years of age.

Prince S---- made the acquaintance of the general's family, and
Adelaida, the second girl, made a great impression upon him. Towards
the spring he proposed to her, and she accepted him. The general and his
wife were delighted. The journey abroad was put off, and the wedding was
fixed for a day not very distant.

The trip abroad might have been enjoyed later on by Mrs. Epanchin and
her two remaining daughters, but for another circumstance.

It so happened that Prince S---- introduced a distant relation of his
own into the Epanchin family--one Evgenie Pavlovitch, a young officer
of about twenty-eight years of age, whose conquests among the ladies in
Moscow had been proverbial. This young gentleman no sooner set eyes on
Aglaya than he became a frequent visitor at the house. He was witty,
well-educated, and extremely wealthy, as the general very soon
discovered. His past reputation was the only thing against him.

Nothing was said; there were not even any hints dropped; but still, it
seemed better to the parents to say nothing more about going abroad
this season, at all events. Aglaya herself perhaps was of a different
opinion.

All this happened just before the second appearance of our hero upon the
scene.

By this time, to judge from appearances, poor Prince Muishkin had been
quite forgotten in St. Petersburg. If he had appeared suddenly among his
acquaintances, he would have been received as one from the skies; but we
must just glance at one more fact before we conclude this preface.

Colia Ivolgin, for some time after the prince's departure, continued his
old life. That is, he went to school, looked after his father, helped
Varia in the house, and ran her errands, and went frequently to see his
friend, Hippolyte.

The lodgers had disappeared very quickly--Ferdishenko soon after the
events at Nastasia Philipovna's, while the prince went to Moscow, as
we know. Gania and his mother went to live with Varia and Ptitsin
immediately after the latter's wedding, while the general was housed
in a debtor's prison by reason of certain IOU's given to the captain's
widow under the impression that they would never be formally
used against him. This unkind action much surprised poor Ardalion
Alexandrovitch, the victim, as he called himself, of an "unbounded trust
in the nobility of the human heart."

When he signed those notes of hand he never dreamt that they would be a
source of future trouble. The event showed that he was mistaken. "Trust
in anyone after this! Have the least confidence in man or woman!" he
cried in bitter tones, as he sat with his new friends in prison, and
recounted to them his favourite stories of the siege of Kars, and the
resuscitated soldier. On the whole, he accommodated himself very well
to his new position. Ptitsin and Varia declared that he was in the right
place, and Gania was of the same opinion. The only person who deplored
his fate was poor Nina Alexandrovna, who wept bitter tears over him,
to the great surprise of her household, and, though always in feeble
health, made a point of going to see him as often as possible.

Since the general's "mishap," as Colia called it, and the marriage of
his sister, the boy had quietly possessed himself of far more freedom.
His relations saw little of him, for he rarely slept at home. He made
many new friends; and was moreover, a frequent visitor at the debtor's
prison, to which he invariably accompanied his mother. Varia, who used
to be always correcting him, never spoke to him now on the subject of
his frequent absences, and the whole household was surprised to see
Gania, in spite of his depression, on quite friendly terms with his
brother. This was something new, for Gania had been wont to look upon
Colia as a kind of errand-boy, treating him with contempt, threatening
to "pull his ears," and in general driving him almost wild with
irritation. It seemed now that Gania really needed his brother, and the
latter, for his part, felt as if he could forgive Gania much since he
had returned the hundred thousand roubles offered to him by Nastasia
Philipovna. Three months after the departure of the prince, the Ivolgin
family discovered that Colia had made acquaintance with the Epanchins,
and was on very friendly terms with the daughters. Varia heard of it
first, though Colia had not asked her to introduce him. Little by little
the family grew quite fond of him. Madame Epanchin at first looked on
him with disdain, and received him coldly, but in a short time he
grew to please her, because, as she said, he "was candid and no
flatterer"----a very true description. From the first he put himself
on an equality with his new friends, and though he sometimes read
newspapers and books to the mistress of the house, it was simply because
he liked to be useful.

One day, however, he and Lizabetha Prokofievna quarrelled seriously
about the "woman question," in the course of a lively discussion on that
burning subject. He told her that she was a tyrant, and that he would
never set foot in her house again. It may seem incredible, but a day
or two after, Madame Epanchin sent a servant with a note begging him to
return, and Colia, without standing on his dignity, did so at once.

Aglaya was the only one of the family whose good graces he could not
gain, and who always spoke to him haughtily, but it so happened that the
boy one day succeeded in giving the proud maiden a surprise.

It was about Easter, when, taking advantage of a momentary tete-a-tete
Colia handed Aglaya a letter, remarking that he "had orders to deliver
it to her privately." She stared at him in amazement, but he did not
wait to hear what she had to say, and went out. Aglaya broke the seal,
and read as follows:

"Once you did me the honour of giving me your confidence. Perhaps you
have quite forgotten me now! How is it that I am writing to you? I do
not know; but I am conscious of an irresistible desire to remind you of
my existence, especially you. How many times I have needed all three of
you; but only you have dwelt always in my mind's eye. I need you--I need
you very much. I will not write about myself. I have nothing to tell
you. But I long for you to be happy. ARE you happy? That is all I wished
to say to you--Your brother,

"PR. L. MUISHKIN."

On reading this short and disconnected note, Aglaya suddenly blushed all
over, and became very thoughtful.

It would be difficult to describe her thoughts at that moment. One of
them was, "Shall I show it to anyone?" But she was ashamed to show it.
So she ended by hiding it in her table drawer, with a very strange,
ironical smile upon her lips.

Next day, she took it out, and put it into a large book, as she usually
did with papers which she wanted to be able to find easily. She laughed
when, about a week later, she happened to notice the name of the book,
and saw that it was Don Quixote, but it would be difficult to say
exactly why.

I cannot say, either, whether she showed the letter to her sisters.

But when she had read it herself once more, it suddenly struck her
that surely that conceited boy, Colia, had not been the one chosen
correspondent of the prince all this while. She determined to ask him,
and did so with an exaggerated show of carelessness. He informed her
haughtily that though he had given the prince his permanent address when
the latter left town, and had offered his services, the prince had never
before given him any commission to perform, nor had he written until the
following lines arrived, with Aglaya's letter. Aglaya took the note, and
read it.


"DEAR COLIA,--Please be so kind as to give the enclosed sealed letter to
Aglaya Ivanovna. Keep well--Ever your loving,

"PR. L. MUISHKIN."


"It seems absurd to trust a little pepper-box like you," said Aglaya,
as she returned the note, and walked past the "pepper-box" with an
expression of great contempt.

This was more than Colia could bear. He had actually borrowed Gania's
new green tie for the occasion, without saying why he wanted it, in
order to impress her. He was very deeply mortified.

IT was the beginning of June, and for a whole week the weather in
St. Petersburg had been magnificent. The Epanchins had a luxurious
country-house at Pavlofsk, [One of the fashionable summer resorts near
St. Petersburg.] and to this spot Mrs. Epanchin determined to proceed
without further delay. In a couple of days all was ready, and the family
had left town. A day or two after this removal to Pavlofsk, Prince
Muishkin arrived in St. Petersburg by the morning train from Moscow. No
one met him; but, as he stepped out of the carriage, he suddenly became
aware of two strangely glowing eyes fixed upon him from among the crowd
that met the train. On endeavouring to re-discover the eyes, and see
to whom they belonged, he could find nothing to guide him. It must have
been a hallucination. But the disagreeable impression remained, and
without this, the prince was sad and thoughtful already, and seemed to
be much preoccupied.

His cab took him to a small and bad hotel near the Litaynaya. Here
he engaged a couple of rooms, dark and badly furnished. He washed and
changed, and hurriedly left the hotel again, as though anxious to
waste no time. Anyone who now saw him for the first time since he
left Petersburg would judge that he had improved vastly so far as his
exterior was concerned. His clothes certainly were very different; they
were more fashionable, perhaps even too much so, and anyone inclined to
mockery might have found something to smile at in his appearance. But
what is there that people will not smile at?

The prince took a cab and drove to a street near the Nativity, where he
soon discovered the house he was seeking. It was a small wooden villa,
and he was struck by its attractive and clean appearance; it stood in
a pleasant little garden, full of flowers. The windows looking on the
street were open, and the sound of a voice, reading aloud or making
a speech, came through them. It rose at times to a shout, and was
interrupted occasionally by bursts of laughter.

Prince Muishkin entered the court-yard, and ascended the steps. A cook
with her sleeves turned up to the elbows opened the door. The visitor
asked if Mr. Lebedeff were at home.

"He is in there," said she, pointing to the salon.

The room had a blue wall-paper, and was well, almost pretentiously,
furnished, with its round table, its divan, and its bronze clock under
a glass shade. There was a narrow pier-glass against the wall, and a
chandelier adorned with lustres hung by a bronze chain from the ceiling.

When the prince entered, Lebedeff was standing in the middle of the
room, his back to the door. He was in his shirt-sleeves, on account of
the extreme heat, and he seemed to have just reached the peroration of
his speech, and was impressively beating his breast.

His audience consisted of a youth of about fifteen years of age with a
clever face, who had a book in his hand, though he was not reading; a
young lady of twenty, in deep mourning, stood near him with an infant in
her arms; another girl of thirteen, also in black, was laughing loudly,
her mouth wide open; and on the sofa lay a handsome young man,
with black hair and eyes, and a suspicion of beard and whiskers. He
frequently interrupted the speaker and argued with him, to the great
delight of the others.

"Lukian Timofeyovitch! Lukian Timofeyovitch! Here's someone to see you!
Look here!... a gentleman to speak to you!... Well, it's not my fault!"
and the cook turned and went away red with anger.

Lebedeff started, and at sight of the prince stood like a statue for a
moment. Then he moved up to him with an ingratiating smile, but stopped
short again.

"Prince! ex-ex-excellency!" he stammered. Then suddenly he ran towards
the girl with the infant, a movement so unexpected by her that she
staggered and fell back, but next moment he was threatening the other
child, who was standing, still laughing, in the doorway. She screamed,
and ran towards the kitchen. Lebedeff stamped his foot angrily;
then, seeing the prince regarding him with amazement, he murmured
apologetically--"Pardon to show respect!... he-he!"

"You are quite wrong..." began the prince.

"At once... at once... in one moment!"

He rushed like a whirlwind from the room, and Muishkin looked
inquiringly at the others.

They were all laughing, and the guest joined in the chorus.

"He has gone to get his coat," said the boy.

"How annoying!" exclaimed the prince. "I thought... Tell me, is he..."

"You think he is drunk?" cried the young man on the sofa. "Not in the
least. He's only had three or four small glasses, perhaps five; but what
is that? The usual thing!"

As the prince opened his mouth to answer, he was interrupted by the
girl, whose sweet face wore an expression of absolute frankness.

"He never drinks much in the morning; if you have come to talk business
with him, do it now. It is the best time. He sometimes comes back drunk
in the evening; but just now he passes the greater part of the evening
in tears, and reads passages of Holy Scripture aloud, because our mother
died five weeks ago."

"No doubt he ran off because he did not know what to say to you,"
said the youth on the divan. "I bet he is trying to cheat you, and is
thinking how best to do it."

Just then Lebedeff returned, having put on his coat.

"Five weeks!" said he, wiping his eyes. "Only five weeks! Poor orphans!"

"But why wear a coat in holes," asked the girl, "when your new one is
hanging behind the door? Did you not see it?"

"Hold your tongue, dragon-fly!" he scolded. "What a plague you are!" He
stamped his foot irritably, but she only laughed, and answered:

"Are you trying to frighten me? I am not Tania, you know, and I don't
intend to run away. Look, you are waking Lubotchka, and she will have
convulsions again. Why do you shout like that?"

"Well, well! I won't again," said the master of the house his anxiety
getting the better of his temper. He went up to his daughter, and looked
at the child in her arms, anxiously making the sign of the cross over
her three times. "God bless her! God bless her!" he cried with emotion.
"This little creature is my daughter Luboff," addressing the prince. "My
wife, Helena, died--at her birth; and this is my big daughter Vera, in
mourning, as you see; and this, this, oh, this pointing to the young man
on the divan...

"Well, go on! never mind me!" mocked the other. "Don't be afraid!"

"Excellency! Have you read that account of the murder of the Zemarin
family, in the newspaper?" cried Lebedeff, all of a sudden.

"Yes," said Muishkin, with some surprise.

"Well, that is the murderer! It is he--in fact--"

"What do you mean?" asked the visitor.

"I am speaking allegorically, of course; but he will be the murderer of
a Zemarin family in the future. He is getting ready. ..."

They all laughed, and the thought crossed the prince's mind that perhaps
Lebedeff was really trifling in this way because he foresaw inconvenient
questions, and wanted to gain time.

"He is a traitor! a conspirator!" shouted Lebedeff, who seemed to have
lost all control over himself. "A monster! a slanderer! Ought I to treat
him as a nephew, the son of my sister Anisia?"

"Oh! do be quiet! You must be drunk! He has taken it into his head to
play the lawyer, prince, and he practices speechifying, and is always
repeating his eloquent pleadings to his children. And who do you think
was his last client? An old woman who had been robbed of five hundred
roubles, her all, by some rogue of a usurer, besought him to take up
her case, instead of which he defended the usurer himself, a Jew named
Zeidler, because this Jew promised to give him fifty roubles...."

"It was to be fifty if I won the case, only five if I lost," interrupted
Lebedeff, speaking in a low tone, a great contrast to his earlier
manner.

"Well! naturally he came to grief: the law is not administered as it
used to be, and he only got laughed at for his pains. But he was much
pleased with himself in spite of that. 'Most learned judge!' said he,
'picture this unhappy man, crippled by age and infirmities, who gains
his living by honourable toil--picture him, I repeat, robbed of his all,
of his last mouthful; remember, I entreat you, the words of that learned
legislator, "Let mercy and justice alike rule the courts of law."' Now,
would you believe it, excellency, every morning he recites this
speech to us from beginning to end, exactly as he spoke it before the
magistrate. To-day we have heard it for the fifth time. He was just
starting again when you arrived, so much does he admire it. He is now
preparing to undertake another case. I think, by the way, that you are
Prince Muishkin? Colia tells me you are the cleverest man he has ever
known...."

"The cleverest in the world," interrupted his uncle hastily.

"I do not pay much attention to that opinion," continued the young man
calmly. "Colia is very fond of you, but he," pointing to Lebedeff, "is
flattering you. I can assure you I have no intention of flattering you,
or anyone else, but at least you have some common-sense. Well, will you
judge between us? Shall we ask the prince to act as arbitrator?" he went
on, addressing his uncle.

"I am so glad you chanced to come here, prince."

"I agree," said Lebedeff, firmly, looking round involuntarily at his
daughter, who had come nearer, and was listening attentively to the
conversation.

"What is it all about?" asked the prince, frowning. His head ached, and
he felt sure that Lebedeff was trying to cheat him in some way, and only
talking to put off the explanation that he had come for.

"I will tell you all the story. I am his nephew; he did speak the truth
there, although he is generally telling lies. I am at the University,
and have not yet finished my course. I mean to do so, and I shall, for
I have a determined character. I must, however, find something to do
for the present, and therefore I have got employment on the railway at
twenty-four roubles a month. I admit that my uncle has helped me once
or twice before. Well, I had twenty roubles in my pocket, and I gambled
them away. Can you believe that I should be so low, so base, as to lose
money in that way?"

"And the man who won it is a rogue, a rogue whom you ought not to have
paid!" cried Lebedeff.

"Yes, he is a rogue, but I was obliged to pay him," said the young man.
"As to his being a rogue, he is assuredly that, and I am not saying it
because he beat you. He is an ex-lieutenant, prince, dismissed from the
service, a teacher of boxing, and one of Rogojin's followers. They are
all lounging about the pavements now that Rogojin has turned them off.
Of course, the worst of it is that, knowing he was a rascal, and a
card-sharper, I none the less played palki with him, and risked my last
rouble. To tell the truth, I thought to myself, 'If I lose, I will go
to my uncle, and I am sure he will not refuse to help me.' Now that was
base-cowardly and base!"

"That is so," observed Lebedeff quietly; "cowardly and base."

"Well, wait a bit, before you begin to triumph," said the nephew
viciously; for the words seemed to irritate him. "He is delighted! I
came to him here and told him everything: I acted honourably, for I did
not excuse myself. I spoke most severely of my conduct, as everyone here
can witness. But I must smarten myself up before I take up my new post,
for I am really like a tramp. Just look at my boots! I cannot possibly
appear like this, and if I am not at the bureau at the time appointed,
the job will be given to someone else; and I shall have to try for
another. Now I only beg for fifteen roubles, and I give my word that
I will never ask him for anything again. I am also ready to promise to
repay my debt in three months' time, and I will keep my word, even if I
have to live on bread and water. My salary will amount to seventy-five
roubles in three months. The sum I now ask, added to what I have
borrowed already, will make a total of about thirty-five roubles, so
you see I shall have enough to pay him and confound him! if he wants
interest, he shall have that, too! Haven't I always paid back the money
he lent me before? Why should he be so mean now? He grudges my having
paid that lieutenant; there can be no other reason! That's the kind he
is--a dog in the manger!"

"And he won't go away!" cried Lebedeff. "He has installed himself here,
and here he remains!"

"I have told you already, that I will not go away until I have got what
I ask. Why are you smiling, prince? You look as if you disapproved of
me."

"I am not smiling, but I really think you are in the wrong, somewhat,"
replied Muishkin, reluctantly.

"Don't shuffle! Say plainly that you think that I am quite wrong,
without any 'somewhat'! Why 'somewhat'?"

"I will say you are quite wrong, if you wish."

"If I wish! That's good, I must say! Do you think I am deceived as to
the flagrant impropriety of my conduct? I am quite aware that his money
is his own, and that my action--As much like an attempt at extortion.
But you-you don't know what life is! If people don't learn by
experience, they never understand. They must be taught. My intentions
are perfectly honest; on my conscience he will lose nothing, and I will
pay back the money with interest. Added to which he has had the moral
satisfaction of seeing me disgraced. What does he want more? and what
is he good for if he never helps anyone? Look what he does himself! just
ask him about his dealings with others, how he deceives people! How did
he manage to buy this house? You may cut off my head if he has not let
you in for something-and if he is not trying to cheat you again. You are
smiling. You don't believe me?"

"It seems to me that all this has nothing to do with your affairs,"
remarked the prince.

"I have lain here now for three days," cried the young man without
noticing, "and I have seen a lot! Fancy! he suspects his daughter, that
angel, that orphan, my cousin--he suspects her, and every evening he
searches her room, to see if she has a lover hidden in it! He comes
here too on tiptoe, creeping softly--oh, so softly--and looks under the
sofa--my bed, you know. He is mad with suspicion, and sees a thief in
every corner. He runs about all night long; he was up at least seven
times last night, to satisfy himself that the windows and doors were
barred, and to peep into the oven. That man who appears in court for
scoundrels, rushes in here in the night and prays, lying prostrate,
banging his head on the ground by the half-hour--and for whom do you
think he prays? Who are the sinners figuring in his drunken petitions?
I have heard him with my own ears praying for the repose of the soul
of the Countess du Barry! Colia heard it too. He is as mad as a March
hare!"

"You hear how he slanders me, prince," said Lebedeff, almost beside
himself with rage. "I may be a drunkard, an evil-doer, a thief, but at
least I can say one thing for myself. He does not know--how should he,
mocker that he is?--that when he came into the world it was I who washed
him, and dressed him in his swathing-bands, for my sister Anisia had
lost her husband, and was in great poverty. I was very little better
off than she, but I sat up night after night with her, and nursed both
mother and child; I used to go downstairs and steal wood for them from
the house-porter. How often did I sing him to sleep when I was half dead
with hunger! In short, I was more than a father to him, and now--now he
jeers at me! Even if I did cross myself, and pray for the repose of the
soul of the Comtesse du Barry, what does it matter? Three days ago,
for the first time in my life, I read her biography in an historical
dictionary. Do you know who she was? You there!" addressing his nephew.
"Speak! do you know?"

"Of course no one knows anything about her but you," muttered the young
man in a would-be jeering tone.

"She was a Countess who rose from shame to reign like a Queen. An
Empress wrote to her, with her own hand, as 'Ma chere cousine.' At
a lever-du-roi one morning (do you know what a lever-du-roi was?)--a
Cardinal, a Papal legate, offered to put on her stockings; a high and
holy person like that looked on it as an honour! Did you know this? I
see by your expression that you did not! Well, how did she die? Answer!"

"Oh! do stop--you are too absurd!"

"This is how she died. After all this honour and glory, after having
been almost a Queen, she was guillotined by that butcher, Samson. She
was quite innocent, but it had to be done, for the satisfaction of the
fishwives of Paris. She was so terrified, that she did not understand
what was happening. But when Samson seized her head, and pushed her
under the knife with his foot, she cried out: 'Wait a moment! wait a
moment, monsieur!' Well, because of that moment of bitter suffering,
perhaps the Saviour will pardon her other faults, for one cannot imagine
a greater agony. As I read the story my heart bled for her. And what
does it matter to you, little worm, if I implored the Divine mercy for
her, great sinner as she was, as I said my evening prayer? I might have
done it because I doubted if anyone had ever crossed himself for her
sake before. It may be that in the other world she will rejoice to think
that a sinner like herself has cried to heaven for the salvation of her
soul. Why are you laughing? You believe nothing, atheist! And your story
was not even correct! If you had listened to what I was saying, you
would have heard that I did not only pray for the Comtesse du Barry. I
said, 'Oh Lord! give rest to the soul of that great sinner, the Comtesse
du Barry, and to all unhappy ones like her.' You see that is quite a
different thing, for how many sinners there are, how many women, who
have passed through the trials of this life, are now suffering and
groaning in purgatory! I prayed for you, too, in spite of your insolence
and impudence, also for your fellows, as it seems that you claim to know
how I pray..."

"Oh! that's enough in all conscience! Pray for whom you choose, and the
devil take them and you! We have a scholar here; you did not know that,
prince?" he continued, with a sneer. "He reads all sorts of books and
memoirs now."

"At any rate, your uncle has a kind heart," remarked the prince, who
really had to force himself to speak to the nephew, so much did he
dislike him.

"Oh, now you are going to praise him! He will be set up! He puts his
hand on his heart, and he is delighted! I never said he was a man
without heart, but he is a rascal--that's the pity of it. And then, he
is addicted to drink, and his mind is unhinged, like that of most
people who have taken more than is good for them for years. He loves his
children--oh, I know that well enough! He respected my aunt, his late
wife... and he even has a sort of affection for me. He has remembered me
in his will."

"I shall leave you nothing!" exclaimed his uncle angrily.

"Listen to me, Lebedeff," said the prince in a decided voice, turning
his back on the young man. "I know by experience that when you choose,
you can be business-like.. I. I have very little time to spare, and
if you... By the way--excuse me--what is your Christian name? I have
forgotten it."

"Ti-Ti-Timofey."

"And?"

"Lukianovitch."

Everyone in the room began to laugh.

"He is telling lies!" cried the nephew. "Even now he cannot speak
the truth. He is not called Timofey Lukianovitch, prince, but Lukian
Timofeyovitch. Now do tell us why you must needs lie about it? Lukian or
Timofey, it is all the same to you, and what difference can it make to
the prince? He tells lies without the least necessity, simply by force
