of habit, I assure you."

"Is that true?" said the prince impatiently.

"My name really is Lukian Timofeyovitch," acknowledged Lebedeff,
lowering his eyes, and putting his hand on his heart.

"Well, for God's sake, what made you say the other?"

"To humble myself," murmured Lebedeff.

"What on earth do you mean? Oh I if only I knew where Colia was at this
moment!" cried the prince, standing up, as if to go.

"I can tell you all about Colia," said the young man

"Oh! no, no!" said Lebedeff, hurriedly.

"Colia spent the night here, and this morning went after his father,
whom you let out of prison by paying his debts--Heaven only knows why!
Yesterday the general promised to come and lodge here, but he did not
appear. Most probably he slept at the hotel close by. No doubt Colia
is there, unless he has gone to Pavlofsk to see the Epanchins. He had a
little money, and was intending to go there yesterday. He must be either
at the hotel or at Pavlofsk."

"At Pavlofsk! He is at Pavlofsk, undoubtedly!" interrupted Lebedeff....
"But come--let us go into the garden--we will have coffee there...." And
Lebedeff seized the prince's arm, and led him from the room. They went
across the yard, and found themselves in a delightful little garden
with the trees already in their summer dress of green, thanks to the
unusually fine weather. Lebedeff invited his guest to sit down on a
green seat before a table of the same colour fixed in the earth, and
took a seat facing him. In a few minutes the coffee appeared, and the
prince did not refuse it. The host kept his eyes fixed on Muishkin, with
an expression of passionate servility.

"I knew nothing about your home before," said the prince absently, as if
he were thinking of something else.

"Poor orphans," began Lebedeff, his face assuming a mournful air, but he
stopped short, for the other looked at him inattentively, as if he had
already forgotten his own remark. They waited a few minutes in silence,
while Lebedeff sat with his eyes fixed mournfully on the young man's
face.

"Well!" said the latter, at last rousing himself. "Ah! yes! You know why
I came, Lebedeff. Your letter brought me. Speak! Tell me all about it."

The clerk, rather confused, tried to say something, hesitated, began to
speak, and again stopped. The prince looked at him gravely.

"I think I understand, Lukian Timofeyovitch: you were not sure that I
should come. You did not think I should start at the first word from
you, and you merely wrote to relieve your conscience. However, you
see now that I have come, and I have had enough of trickery. Give up
serving, or trying to serve, two masters. Rogojin has been here these
three weeks. Have you managed to sell her to him as you did before? Tell
me the truth."

"He discovered everything, the monster... himself......"

"Don't abuse him; though I dare say you have something to complain
of...."

"He beat me, he thrashed me unmercifully!" replied Lebedeff vehemently.
"He set a dog on me in Moscow, a bloodhound, a terrible beast that
chased me all down the street."

"You seem to take me for a child, Lebedeff. Tell me, is it a fact that
she left him while they were in Moscow?"

"Yes, it is a fact, and this time, let me tell you, on the very eve of
their marriage! It was a question of minutes when she slipped off to
Petersburg. She came to me directly she arrived--'Save me, Lukian! find
me some refuge, and say nothing to the prince!' She is afraid of you,
even more than she is of him, and in that she shows her wisdom!" And
Lebedeff slily put his finger to his brow as he said the last words.

"And now it is you who have brought them together again?"

"Excellency, how could I, how could I prevent it?"

"That will do. I can find out for myself. Only tell me, where is she
now? At his house? With him?"

"Oh no! Certainly not! 'I am free,' she says; you know how she insists
on that point. 'I am entirely free.' She repeats it over and over again.
She is living in Petersburgskaia, with my sister-in-law, as I told you
in my letter."

"She is there at this moment?"

"Yes, unless she has gone to Pavlofsk: the fine weather may have tempted
her, perhaps, into the country, with Daria Alexeyevna. 'I am quite
free,' she says. Only yesterday she boasted of her freedom to Nicolai
Ardalionovitch--a bad sign," added Lebedeff, smiling.

"Colia goes to see her often, does he not?"

"He is a strange boy, thoughtless, and inclined to be indiscreet."

"Is it long since you saw her?"

"I go to see her every day, every day."

"Then you were there yesterday?"

"N-no: I have not been these three last days."

"It is a pity you have taken too much wine, Lebedeff I want to ask you
something... but..."

"All right! all right! I am not drunk," replied the clerk, preparing to
listen.

"Tell me, how was she when you left her?"

"She is a woman who is seeking..."

"Seeking?"

"She seems always to be searching about, as if she had lost something.
The mere idea of her coming marriage disgusts her; she looks on it as
an insult. She cares as much for HIM as for a piece of orange-peel--not
more. Yet I am much mistaken if she does not look on him with fear and
trembling. She forbids his name to be mentioned before her, and they
only meet when unavoidable. He understands, well enough! But it must be
gone through She is restless, mocking, deceitful, violent...."

"Deceitful and violent?"

"Yes, violent. I can give you a proof of it. A few days ago she tried
to pull my hair because I said something that annoyed her. I tried to
soothe her by reading the Apocalypse aloud."

"What?" exclaimed the prince, thinking he had not heard aright.

"By reading the Apocalypse. The lady has a restless imagination, he-he!
She has a liking for conversation on serious subjects, of any kind; in
fact they please her so much, that it flatters her to discuss them. Now
for fifteen years at least I have studied the Apocalypse, and she agrees
with me in thinking that the present is the epoch represented by the
third horse, the black one whose rider holds a measure in his hand. It
seems to me that everything is ruled by measure in our century; all men
are clamouring for their rights; 'a measure of wheat for a penny, and
three measures of barley for a penny.' But, added to this, men desire
freedom of mind and body, a pure heart, a healthy life, and all God's
good gifts. Now by pleading their rights alone, they will never attain
all this, so the white horse, with his rider Death, comes next, and
is followed by Hell. We talked about this matter when we met, and it
impressed her very much."

"Do you believe all this?" asked Muishkin, looking curiously at his
companion.

"I both believe it and explain it. I am but a poor creature, a beggar,
an atom in the scale of humanity. Who has the least respect for
Lebedeff? He is a target for all the world, the butt of any fool who
chooses to kick him. But in interpreting revelation I am the equal
of anyone, great as he may be! Such is the power of the mind and
the spirit. I have made a lordly personage tremble, as he sat in his
armchair... only by talking to him of things concerning the spirit.
Two years ago, on Easter Eve, His Excellency Nil Alexeyovitch, whose
subordinate I was then, wished to hear what I had to say, and sent a
message by Peter Zakkaritch to ask me to go to his private room. 'They
tell me you expound the prophecies relating to Antichrist,' said he,
when we were alone. 'Is that so?' 'Yes,' I answered unhesitatingly, and
I began to give some comments on the Apostle's allegorical vision. At
first he smiled, but when we reached the numerical computations and
correspondences, he trembled, and turned pale. Then he begged me to
close the book, and sent me away, promising to put my name on the reward
list. That took place as I said on the eve of Easter, and eight days
later his soul returned to God."

"What?"

"It is the truth. One evening after dinner he stumbled as he stepped
out of his carriage. He fell, and struck his head on the curb, and died
immediately. He was seventy-three years of age, and had a red face, and
white hair; he deluged himself with scent, and was always smiling like
a child. Peter Zakkaritch recalled my interview with him, and said, 'YOU
FORETOLD HIS DEATH.'"

The prince rose from his seat, and Lebedeff, surprised to see his
guest preparing to go so soon, remarked: "You are not interested?" in a
respectful tone.

"I am not very well, and my head aches. Doubtless the effect of the
journey," replied the prince, frowning.

"You should go into the country," said Lebedeff timidly.

The prince seemed to be considering the suggestion.

"You see, I am going into the country myself in three days, with my
children and belongings. The little one is delicate; she needs change
of air; and during our absence this house will be done up. I am going to
Pavlofsk."

"You are going to Pavlofsk too?" asked the prince sharply. "Everybody
seems to be going there. Have you a house in that neighbourhood?"

"I don't know of many people going to Pavlofsk, and as for the house,
Ivan Ptitsin has let me one of his villas rather cheaply. It is a
pleasant place, lying on a hill surrounded by trees, and one can live
there for a mere song. There is good music to be heard, so no wonder it
is popular. I shall stay in the lodge. As to the villa itself..."

"Have you let it?"

"N-no--not exactly."

"Let it to me," said the prince.

Now this was precisely what Lebedeff had made up his mind to do in the
last three minutes. Not that he had any difficulty in finding a tenant;
in fact the house was occupied at present by a chance visitor, who had
told Lebedeff that he would perhaps take it for the summer months. The
clerk knew very well that this "PERHAPS" meant "CERTAINLY," but as he
thought he could make more out of a tenant like the prince, he felt
justified in speaking vaguely about the present inhabitant's intentions.
"This is quite a coincidence," thought he, and when the subject of price
was mentioned, he made a gesture with his hand, as if to waive away a
question of so little importance.

"Oh well, as you like!" said Muishkin. "I will think it over. You shall
lose nothing!"

They were walking slowly across the garden.

"But if you... I could..." stammered Lebedeff, "if... if you please,
prince, tell you something on the subject which would interest you, I am
sure." He spoke in wheedling tones, and wriggled as he walked along.

Muishkin stopped short.

"Daria Alexeyevna also has a villa at Pavlofsk."

"Well?"

"A certain person is very friendly with her, and intends to visit her
pretty often."

"Well?"

"Aglaya Ivanovna..."

"Oh stop, Lebedeff!" interposed Muishkin, feeling as if he had been
touched on an open wound. "That... that has nothing to do with me. I
should like to know when you are going to start. The sooner the better
as far as I am concerned, for I am at an hotel."

They had left the garden now, and were crossing the yard on their way to
the gate.

"Well, leave your hotel at once and come here; then we can all go
together to Pavlofsk the day after tomorrow."

"I will think about it," said the prince dreamily, and went off.

The clerk stood looking after his guest, struck by his sudden
absent-mindedness. He had not even remembered to say goodbye, and
Lebedeff was the more surprised at the omission, as he knew by
experience how courteous the prince usually was.

III

It was now close on twelve o'clock.

The prince knew that if he called at the Epanchins' now he would only
find the general, and that the latter might probably carry him straight
off to Pavlofsk with him; whereas there was one visit he was most
anxious to make without delay.

So at the risk of missing General Epanchin altogether, and thus
postponing his visit to Pavlofsk for a day, at least, the prince decided
to go and look for the house he desired to find.

The visit he was about to pay was, in some respects, a risky one. He was
in two minds about it, but knowing that the house was in the Gorohovaya,
not far from the Sadovaya, he determined to go in that direction, and to
try to make up his mind on the way.

Arrived at the point where the Gorohovaya crosses the Sadovaya, he was
surprised to find how excessively agitated he was. He had no idea that
his heart could beat so painfully.

One house in the Gorohovaya began to attract his attention long before
he reached it, and the prince remembered afterwards that he had said
to himself: "That is the house, I'm sure of it." He came up to it quite
curious to discover whether he had guessed right, and felt that he would
be disagreeably impressed to find that he had actually done so. The
house was a large gloomy-looking structure, without the slightest claim
to architectural beauty, in colour a dirty green. There are a few of
these old houses, built towards the end of the last century, still
standing in that part of St. Petersburg, and showing little change
from their original form and colour. They are solidly built, and are
remarkable for the thickness of their walls, and for the fewness
of their windows, many of which are covered by gratings. On the
ground-floor there is usually a money-changer's shop, and the owner
lives over it. Without as well as within, the houses seem inhospitable
and mysterious--an impression which is difficult to explain, unless it
has something to do with the actual architectural style. These houses
are almost exclusively inhabited by the merchant class.

Arrived at the gate, the prince looked up at the legend over it, which
ran:

"House of Rogojin, hereditary and honourable citizen."

He hesitated no longer; but opened the glazed door at the bottom of the
outer stairs and made his way up to the second storey. The place was
dark and gloomy-looking; the walls of the stone staircase were painted
a dull red. Rogojin and his mother and brother occupied the whole of
the second floor. The servant who opened the door to Muishkin led him,
without taking his name, through several rooms and up and down many
steps until they arrived at a door, where he knocked.

Parfen Rogojin opened the door himself.

On seeing the prince he became deadly white, and apparently fixed to the
ground, so that he was more like a marble statue than a human being. The
prince had expected some surprise, but Rogojin evidently considered his
visit an impossible and miraculous event. He stared with an expression
almost of terror, and his lips twisted into a bewildered smile.

"Parfen! perhaps my visit is ill-timed. I-I can go away again if you
like," said Muishkin at last, rather embarrassed.

"No, no; it's all right, come in," said Parfen, recollecting himself.

They were evidently on quite familiar terms. In Moscow they had had many
occasions of meeting; indeed, some few of those meetings were but too
vividly impressed upon their memories. They had not met now, however,
for three months.

The deathlike pallor, and a sort of slight convulsion about the lips,
had not left Rogojin's face. Though he welcomed his guest, he was still
obviously much disturbed. As he invited the prince to sit down near the
table, the latter happened to turn towards him, and was startled by the
strange expression on his face. A painful recollection flashed into
his mind. He stood for a time, looking straight at Rogojin, whose eyes
seemed to blaze like fire. At last Rogojin smiled, though he still
looked agitated and shaken.

"What are you staring at me like that for?" he muttered. "Sit down."

The prince took a chair.

"Parfen," he said, "tell me honestly, did you know that I was coming to
Petersburg or no?"

"Oh, I supposed you were coming," the other replied, smiling
sarcastically, "and I was right in my supposition, you see; but how was I
to know that you would come TODAY?"

A certain strangeness and impatience in his manner impressed the prince
very forcibly.

"And if you had known that I was coming today, why be so irritated about
it?" he asked, in quiet surprise.

"Why did you ask me?"

"Because when I jumped out of the train this morning, two eyes glared at
me just as yours did a moment since."

"Ha! and whose eyes may they have been?" said Rogojin, suspiciously. It
seemed to the prince that he was trembling.

"I don't know; I thought it was a hallucination. I often have
hallucinations nowadays. I feel just as I did five years ago when my
fits were about to come on."

"Well, perhaps it was a hallucination, I don't know," said Parfen.

He tried to give the prince an affectionate smile, and it seemed to the
latter as though in this smile of his something had broken, and that he
could not mend it, try as he would.

"Shall you go abroad again then?" he asked, and suddenly added, "Do you
remember how we came up in the train from Pskoff together? You and your
cloak and leggings, eh?"

And Rogojin burst out laughing, this time with unconcealed malice, as
though he were glad that he had been able to find an opportunity for
giving vent to it.

"Have you quite taken up your quarters here?" asked the prince

"Yes, I'm at home. Where else should I go to?"

"We haven't met for some time. Meanwhile I have heard things about you
which I should not have believed to be possible."

"What of that? People will say anything," said Rogojin drily.

"At all events, you've disbanded your troop--and you are living in your
own house instead of being fast and loose about the place; that's all
very good. Is this house all yours, or joint property?"

"It is my mother's. You get to her apartments by that passage."

"Where's your brother?"

"In the other wing."

"Is he married?"

"Widower. Why do you want to know all this?"

The prince looked at him, but said nothing. He had suddenly relapsed
into musing, and had probably not heard the question at all. Rogojin did
not insist upon an answer, and there was silence for a few moments.

"I guessed which was your house from a hundred yards off," said the
prince at last.

"Why so?"

"I don't quite know. Your house has the aspect of yourself and all your
family; it bears the stamp of the Rogojin life; but ask me why I think
so, and I can tell you nothing. It is nonsense, of course. I am nervous
about this kind of thing troubling me so much. I had never before
imagined what sort of a house you would live in, and yet no sooner did I
set eyes on this one than I said to myself that it must be yours."

"Really!" said Rogojin vaguely, not taking in what the prince meant by
his rather obscure remarks.

The room they were now sitting in was a large one, lofty but dark, well
furnished, principally with writing-tables and desks covered with papers
and books. A wide sofa covered with red morocco evidently served Rogojin
for a bed. On the table beside which the prince had been invited to seat
himself lay some books; one containing a marker where the reader had
left off, was a volume of Solovieff's History. Some oil-paintings in
worn gilded frames hung on the walls, but it was impossible to make out
what subjects they represented, so blackened were they by smoke and age.
One, a life-sized portrait, attracted the prince's attention. It showed
a man of about fifty, wearing a long riding-coat of German cut. He had
two medals on his breast; his beard was white, short and thin; his face
yellow and wrinkled, with a sly, suspicious expression in the eyes.

"That is your father, is it not?" asked the prince.

"Yes, it is," replied Rogojin with an unpleasant smile, as if he
had expected his guest to ask the question, and then to make some
disagreeable remark.

"Was he one of the Old Believers?"

"No, he went to church, but to tell the truth he really preferred the
old religion. This was his study and is now mine. Why did you ask if he
were an Old Believer?"

"Are you going to be married here?"

"Ye-yes!" replied Rogojin, starting at the unexpected question.

"Soon?"

"You know yourself it does not depend on me."

"Parfen, I am not your enemy, and I do not intend to oppose your
intentions in any way. I repeat this to you now just as I said it to you
once before on a very similar occasion. When you were arranging for your
projected marriage in Moscow, I did not interfere with you--you know I
did not. That first time she fled to me from you, from the very altar
almost, and begged me to 'save her from you.' Afterwards she ran away
from me again, and you found her and arranged your marriage with her
once more; and now, I hear, she has run away from you and come to
Petersburg. Is it true? Lebedeff wrote me to this effect, and that's
why I came here. That you had once more arranged matters with Nastasia
Philipovna I only learned last night in the train from a friend of
yours, Zaleshoff--if you wish to know.

"I confess I came here with an object. I wished to persuade Nastasia
to go abroad for her health; she requires it. Both mind and body need a
change badly. I did not intend to take her abroad myself. I was going to
arrange for her to go without me. Now I tell you honestly, Parfen, if it
is true that all is made up between you, I will not so much as set eyes
upon her, and I will never even come to see you again.

"You know quite well that I am telling the truth, because I have always
been frank with you. I have never concealed my own opinion from you.
I have always told you that I consider a marriage between you and her
would be ruin to her. You would also be ruined, and perhaps even more
hopelessly. If this marriage were to be broken off again, I admit I
should be greatly pleased; but at the same time I have not the slightest
intention of trying to part you. You may be quite easy in your mind,
and you need not suspect me. You know yourself whether I was ever really
your rival or not, even when she ran away and came to me.

"There, you are laughing at me--I know why you laugh. It is perfectly
true that we lived apart from one another all the time, in different
towns. I told you before that I did not love her with love, but with
pity! You said then that you understood me; did you really understand
me or not? What hatred there is in your eyes at this moment! I came
to relieve your mind, because you are dear to me also. I love you
very much, Parfen; and now I shall go away and never come back again.
Goodbye."

The prince rose.

"Stay a little," said Parfen, not leaving his chair and resting his head
on his right hand. "I haven't seen you for a long time."

The prince sat down again. Both were silent for a few moments.

"When you are not with me I hate you, Lef Nicolaievitch. I have loathed
you every day of these three months since I last saw you. By heaven I
have!" said Rogojin. "I could have poisoned you at any minute. Now, you
have been with me but a quarter of an hour, and all my malice seems to
have melted away, and you are as dear to me as ever. Stay here a little
longer."

"When I am with you you trust me; but as soon as my back is turned you
suspect me," said the prince, smiling, and trying to hide his emotion.

"I trust your voice, when I hear you speak. I quite understand that you
and I cannot be put on a level, of course."

"Why did you add that?--There! Now you are cross again," said the
prince, wondering.

"We were not asked, you see. We were made different, with different
tastes and feelings, without being consulted. You say you love her with
pity. I have no pity for her. She hates me--that's the plain truth of
the matter. I dream of her every night, and always that she is laughing
at me with another man. And so she does laugh at me. She thinks no more
of marrying me than if she were changing her shoe. Would you believe it,
I haven't seen her for five days, and I daren't go near her. She asks me
what I come for, as if she were not content with having disgraced me--"

"Disgraced you! How?"

"Just as though you didn't know! Why, she ran away from me, and went to
you. You admitted it yourself, just now."

"But surely you do not believe that she..."

"That she did not disgrace me at Moscow with that officer. Zemtuznikoff?
I know for certain she did, after having fixed our marriage-day
herself!"

"Impossible!" cried the prince.

"I know it for a fact," replied Rogojin, with conviction.

"It is not like her, you say? My friend, that's absurd. Perhaps such an
act would horrify her, if she were with you, but it is quite different
where I am concerned. She looks on me as vermin. Her affair with Keller
was simply to make a laughing-stock of me. You don't know what a fool
she made of me in Moscow; and the money I spent over her! The money! the
money!"

"And you can marry her now, Parfen! What will come of it all?" said the
prince, with dread in his voice.

Rogojin gazed back gloomily, and with a terrible expression in his eyes,
but said nothing.

"I haven't been to see her for five days," he repeated, after a slight
pause. "I'm afraid of being turned out. She says she's still her own
mistress, and may turn me off altogether, and go abroad. She told me
this herself," he said, with a peculiar glance at Muishkin. "I think she
often does it merely to frighten me. She is always laughing at me, for
some reason or other; but at other times she's angry, and won't say a
word, and that's what I'm afraid of. I took her a shawl one day, the
like of which she might never have seen, although she did live in luxury
and she gave it away to her maid, Katia. Sometimes when I can keep away
no longer, I steal past the house on the sly, and once I watched at the
gate till dawn--I thought something was going on--and she saw me from
the window. She asked me what I should do if I found she had deceived
me. I said, 'You know well enough.'"

"What did she know?" cried the prince.

"How was I to tell?" replied Rogojin, with an angry laugh. "I did my
best to catch her tripping in Moscow, but did not succeed. However, I
caught hold of her one day, and said: 'You are engaged to be married
into a respectable family, and do you know what sort of a woman you are?
THAT'S the sort of woman you are,' I said."

"You told her that?"

"Yes."

"Well, go on."

"She said, 'I wouldn't even have you for a footman now, much less for
a husband.' 'I shan't leave the house,' I said, 'so it doesn't matter.'
'Then I shall call somebody and have you kicked out,' she cried. So then
I rushed at her, and beat her till she was bruised all over."

"Impossible!" cried the prince, aghast.

"I tell you it's true," said Rogojin quietly, but with eyes ablaze with
passion.

"Then for a day and a half I neither slept, nor ate, nor drank, and
would not leave her. I knelt at her feet: 'I shall die here,' I said,
'if you don't forgive me; and if you have me turned out, I shall drown
myself; because, what should I be without you now?' She was like a
madwoman all that day; now she would cry; now she would threaten me with
a knife; now she would abuse me. She called in Zaleshoff and Keller,
and showed me to them, shamed me in their presence. 'Let's all go to
the theatre,' she says, 'and leave him here if he won't go--it's not
my business. They'll give you some tea, Parfen Semeonovitch, while I
am away, for you must be hungry.' She came back from the theatre alone.
'Those cowards wouldn't come,' she said. 'They are afraid of you, and
tried to frighten me, too. "He won't go away as he came," they said,
"he'll cut your throat--see if he doesn't." Now, I shall go to my
bedroom, and I shall not even lock my door, just to show you how much
I am afraid of you. You must be shown that once for all. Did you have
tea?' 'No,' I said, 'and I don't intend to.' 'Ha, ha! you are playing
off your pride against your stomach! That sort of heroism doesn't sit
well on you,' she said.

"With that she did as she had said she would; she went to bed, and did
not lock her door. In the morning she came out. 'Are you quite mad?' she
said, sharply. 'Why, you'll die of hunger like this.' 'Forgive me,'
I said. 'No, I won't, and I won't marry you. I've said it. Surely you
haven't sat in this chair all night without sleeping?' 'I didn't
sleep,' I said. 'H'm! how sensible of you. And are you going to have no
breakfast or dinner today?' 'I told you I wouldn't. Forgive me!' 'You've
no idea how unbecoming this sort of thing is to you,' she said, 'it's
like putting a saddle on a cow's back. Do you think you are frightening
me? My word, what a dreadful thing that you should sit here and eat no
food! How terribly frightened I am!' She wasn't angry long, and didn't
seem to remember my offence at all. I was surprised, for she is a
vindictive, resentful woman--but then I thought that perhaps she
despised me too much to feel any resentment against me. And that's the
truth.

"She came up to me and said, 'Do you know who the Pope of Rome is?'
'I've heard of him,' I said. 'I suppose you've read the Universal
History, Parfen Semeonovitch, haven't you?' she asked. 'I've learned
nothing at all,' I said. 'Then I'll lend it to you to read. You must
know there was a Roman Pope once, and he was very angry with a certain
Emperor; so the Emperor came and neither ate nor drank, but knelt before
the Pope's palace till he should be forgiven. And what sort of vows do
you think that Emperor was making during all those days on his knees?
Stop, I'll read it to you!' Then she read me a lot of verses, where it
said that the Emperor spent all the time vowing vengeance against the
Pope. 'You don't mean to say you don't approve of the poem, Parfen
Semeonovitch,' she says. 'All you have read out is perfectly true,' say
I. 'Aha!' says she, 'you admit it's true, do you? And you are making
vows to yourself that if I marry you, you will remind me of all this,
and take it out of me.' 'I don't know,' I say, 'perhaps I was thinking
like that, and perhaps I was not. I'm not thinking of anything just
now.' 'What are your thoughts, then?' 'I'm thinking that when you rise
from your chair and go past me, I watch you, and follow you with my
eyes; if your dress does but rustle, my heart sinks; if you leave the
room, I remember every little word and action, and what your voice
sounded like, and what you said. I thought of nothing all last night,
but sat here listening to your sleeping breath, and heard you move a
little, twice.' 'And as for your attack upon me,' she says, 'I suppose
you never once thought of THAT?' 'Perhaps I did think of it, and perhaps
not,' I say. And what if I don't either forgive you or marry, you'
'I tell you I shall go and drown myself.' 'H'm!' she said, and then
relapsed into silence. Then she got angry, and went out. 'I suppose
you'd murder me before you drowned yourself, though!' she cried as she
left the room.

"An hour later, she came to me again, looking melancholy. 'I will marry
you, Parfen Semeonovitch,' she says, not because I'm frightened of you,
but because it's all the same to me how I ruin myself. And how can I do
it better? Sit down; they'll bring you some dinner directly. And if I
do marry you, I'll be a faithful wife to you--you need not doubt that.'
Then she thought a bit, and said, 'At all events, you are not a flunkey;
at first, I thought you were no better than a flunkey.' And she arranged
the wedding and fixed the day straight away on the spot.

"Then, in another week, she had run away again, and came here to
Lebedeff's; and when I found her here, she said to me, 'I'm not going to
renounce you altogether, but I wish to put off the wedding a bit longer
yet--just as long as I like--for I am still my own mistress; so you may
wait, if you like.' That's how the matter stands between us now. What do
you think of all this, Lef Nicolaievitch?"

"'What do you think of it yourself?" replied the prince, looking sadly
at Rogojin.

"As if I can think anything about it! I--" He was about to say more, but
stopped in despair.

The prince rose again, as if he would leave.

"At all events, I shall not interfere with you!" he murmured, as though
making answer to some secret thought of his own.

"I'll tell you what!" cried Rogojin, and his eyes flashed fire. "I can't
understand your yielding her to me like this; I don't understand it.
Have you given up loving her altogether? At first you suffered badly--I
know it--I saw it. Besides, why did you come post-haste after us? Out of
pity, eh? He, he, he!" His mouth curved in a mocking smile.

"Do you think I am deceiving you?" asked the prince.

"No! I trust you--but I can't understand. It seems to me that your pity
is greater than my love." A hungry longing to speak his mind out seemed
to flash in the man's eyes, combined with an intense anger.

"Your love is mingled with hatred, and therefore, when your love passes,
there will be the greater misery," said the prince. "I tell you this,
Parfen--"

"What! that I'll cut her throat, you mean?"

The prince shuddered.

"You'll hate her afterwards for all your present love, and for all the
torment you are suffering on her account now. What seems to me the most
extraordinary thing is, that she can again consent to marry you, after
all that has passed between you. When I heard the news yesterday, I
could hardly bring myself to believe it. Why, she has run twice
from you, from the very altar rails, as it were. She must have some
presentiment of evil. What can she want with you now? Your money?
Nonsense! Besides, I should think you must have made a fairly large hole
in your fortune already. Surely it is not because she is so very anxious
to find a husband? She could find many a one besides yourself. Anyone
would be better than you, because you will murder her, and I feel sure
she must know that but too well by now. Is it because you love her so
passionately? Indeed, that may be it. I have heard that there are women
who want just that kind of love... but still..." The prince paused,
reflectively.

"What are you grinning at my father's portrait again for?" asked
Rogojin, suddenly. He was carefully observing every change in the
expression of the prince's face.

"I smiled because the idea came into my head that if it were not for
this unhappy passion of yours you might have, and would have, become
just such a man as your father, and that very quickly, too. You'd have
settled down in this house of yours with some silent and obedient wife.
You would have spoken rarely, trusted no one, heeded no one, and thought
of nothing but making money."

"Laugh away! She said exactly the same, almost word for word, when she
saw my father's portrait. It's remarkable how entirely you and she are
at one now-a-days."

"What, has she been here?" asked the prince with curiosity.

"Yes! She looked long at the portrait and asked all about my father.
'You'd be just such another,' she said at last, and laughed. 'You have
such strong passions, Parfen,' she said, 'that they'd have taken you to
Siberia in no time if you had not, luckily, intelligence as well. For
you have a good deal of intelligence.' (She said this--believe it or
not. The first time I ever heard anything of that sort from her.) 'You'd
soon have thrown up all this rowdyism that you indulge in now, and you'd
have settled down to quiet, steady money-making, because you have little
education; and here you'd have stayed just like your father before you.
And you'd have loved your money so that you'd amass not two million,
like him, but ten million; and you'd have died of hunger on your money
bags to finish up with, for you carry everything to extremes.' There,
that's exactly word for word as she said it to me. She never talked to
me like that before. She always talks nonsense and laughs when she's
with me. We went all over this old house together. 'I shall change all
this,' I said, 'or else I'll buy a new house for the wedding.' 'No, no!'
she said, 'don't touch anything; leave it all as it is; I shall live
with your mother when I marry you.'

"I took her to see my mother, and she was as respectful and kind as
though she were her own daughter. Mother has been almost demented ever
since father died--she's an old woman. She sits and bows from her chair
to everyone she sees. If you left her alone and didn't feed her for
three days, I don't believe she would notice it. Well, I took her hand,
and I said, 'Give your blessing to this lady, mother, she's going to be
my wife.' So Nastasia kissed mother's hand with great feeling. 'She must
have suffered terribly, hasn't she?' she said. She saw this book here
lying before me. 'What! have you begun to read Russian history?' she
asked. She told me once in Moscow, you know, that I had better get
Solovieff's Russian History and read it, because I knew nothing. 'That's
good,' she said, 'you go on like that, reading books. I'll make you
a list myself of the books you ought to read first--shall I?' She had
never once spoken to me like this before; it was the first time I felt I
could breathe before her like a living creature."

"I'm very, very glad to hear of this, Parfen," said the prince, with
real feeling. "Who knows? Maybe God will yet bring you near to one
another."

"Never, never!" cried Rogojin, excitedly.

"Look here, Parfen; if you love her so much, surely you must be anxious
to earn her respect? And if you do so wish, surely you may hope to? I
said just now that I considered it extraordinary that she could still be
ready to marry you. Well, though I cannot yet understand it, I feel sure
she must have some good reason, or she wouldn't do it. She is sure
of your love; but besides that, she must attribute SOMETHING else to
you--some good qualities, otherwise the thing would not be. What you
have just said confirms my words. You say yourself that she found it
possible to speak to you quite differently from her usual manner. You
are suspicious, you know, and jealous, therefore when anything annoying
happens to you, you exaggerate its significance. Of course, of course,
she does not think so ill of you as you say. Why, if she did, she would
simply be walking to death by drowning or by the knife, with her eyes
wide open, when she married you. It is impossible! As if anybody would
go to their death deliberately!"

Rogojin listened to the prince's excited words with a bitter smile. His
conviction was, apparently, unalterable.

"How dreadfully you look at me, Parfen!" said the prince, with a feeling
of dread.

"Water or the knife?" said the latter, at last. "Ha, ha--that's exactly
why she is going to marry me, because she knows for certain that the
knife awaits her. Prince, can it be that you don't even yet see what's
at the root of it all?"

"I don't understand you."

"Perhaps he really doesn't understand me! They do say that you are
a--you know what! She loves another--there, you can understand that
much! Just as I love her, exactly so she loves another man. And that
other man is--do you know who? It's you. There--you didn't know that,
eh?"

"I?"

"You, you! She has loved you ever since that day, her birthday! Only
she thinks she cannot marry you, because it would be the ruin of you.
'Everybody knows what sort of a woman I am,' she says. She told me all
this herself, to my very face! She's afraid of disgracing and ruining
you, she says, but it doesn't matter about me. She can marry me all
right! Notice how much consideration she shows for me!"

"But why did she run away to me, and then again from me to--"

"From you to me? Ha, ha! that's nothing! Why, she always acts as though
she were in a delirium now-a-days! Either she says, 'Come on, I'll marry
you! Let's have the wedding quickly!' and fixes the day, and seems in a
hurry for it, and when it begins to come near she feels frightened; or
else some other idea gets into her head--goodness knows! you've seen
her--you know how she goes on--laughing and crying and raving! There's
nothing extraordinary about her having run away from you! She ran away
because she found out how dearly she loved you. She could not bear to be
near you. You said just now that I had found her at Moscow, when she ran
away from you. I didn't do anything of the sort; she came to me herself,
straight from you. 'Name the day--I'm ready!' she said. 'Let's have
some champagne, and go and hear the gipsies sing!' I tell you she'd
have thrown herself into the water long ago if it were not for me! She
doesn't do it because I am, perhaps, even more dreadful to her than the
water! She's marrying me out of spite; if she marries me, I tell you, it
will be for spite!"

"But how do you, how can you--" began the prince, gazing with dread and
horror at Rogojin.

"Why don't you finish your sentence? Shall I tell you what you were
thinking to yourself just then? You were thinking, 'How can she marry
him after this? How can it possibly be permitted?' Oh, I know what you
were thinking about!"

"I didn't come here for that purpose, Parfen. That was not in my mind--"

"That may be! Perhaps you didn't COME with the idea, but the idea is
certainly there NOW! Ha, ha! well, that's enough! What are you upset
about? Didn't you really know it all before? You astonish me!"

"All this is mere jealousy--it is some malady of yours, Parfen! You
exaggerate everything," said the prince, excessively agitated. "What are
you doing?"

"Let go of it!" said Parfen, seizing from the prince's hand a knife
which the latter had at that moment taken up from the table, where it
lay beside the history. Parfen replaced it where it had been.

"I seemed to know it--I felt it, when I was coming back to Petersburg,"
continued the prince, "I did not want to come, I wished to forget all
this, to uproot it from my memory altogether! Well, good-bye--what is
the matter?"

He had absently taken up the knife a second time, and again Rogojin
snatched it from his hand, and threw it down on the table. It was a
plain looking knife, with a bone handle, a blade about eight inches long,
and broad in proportion, it did not clasp.

Seeing that the prince was considerably struck by the fact that he had
twice seized this knife out of his hand, Rogojin caught it up with
some irritation, put it inside the book, and threw the latter across to
another table.

"Do you cut your pages with it, or what?" asked Muishkin, still rather
absently, as though unable to throw off a deep preoccupation into which
the conversation had thrown him.

"Yes."

"It's a garden knife, isn't it?"

"Yes. Can't one cut pages with a garden knife?"

"It's quite new."

"Well, what of that? Can't I buy a new knife if I like?" shouted Rogojin
furiously, his irritation growing with every word.

The prince shuddered, and gazed fixedly at Parfen. Suddenly he burst out
laughing.

"Why, what an idea!" he said. "I didn't mean to ask you any of these
questions; I was thinking of something quite different! But my head is
heavy, and I seem so absent-minded nowadays! Well, good-bye--I can't
remember what I wanted to say--good-bye!"

"Not that way," said Rogojin.

"There, I've forgotten that too!"

"This way--come along--I'll show you."

IV.

THEY passed through the same rooms which the prince had traversed on his
arrival. In the largest there were pictures on the walls, portraits and
landscapes of little interest. Over the door, however, there was one of
strange and rather striking shape; it was six or seven feet in length,
and not more than a foot in height. It represented the Saviour just
taken from the cross.

The prince glanced at it, but took no further notice. He moved on
hastily, as though anxious to get out of the house. But Rogojin suddenly
stopped underneath the picture.

"My father picked up all these pictures very cheap at auctions, and so
on," he said; "they are all rubbish, except the one over the door, and
that is valuable. A man offered five hundred roubles for it last week."

"Yes--that's a copy of a Holbein," said the prince, looking at it again,
"and a good copy, too, so far as I am able to judge. I saw the picture
abroad, and could not forget it--what's the matter?"

Rogojin had dropped the subject of the picture and walked on. Of course
his strange frame of mind was sufficient to account for his conduct;
but, still, it seemed queer to the prince that he should so abruptly
drop a conversation commenced by himself. Rogojin did not take any
notice of his question.

"Lef Nicolaievitch," said Rogojin, after a pause, during which the two
walked along a little further, "I have long wished to ask you, do you
believe in God?"

"How strangely you speak, and how odd you look!" said the other,
involuntarily.

"I like looking at that picture," muttered Rogojin, not noticing,
apparently, that the prince had not answered his question.

"That picture! That picture!" cried Muishkin, struck by a sudden idea.
"Why, a man's faith might be ruined by looking at that picture!"

"So it is!" said Rogojin, unexpectedly. They had now reached the front
door.

The prince stopped.

"How?" he said. "What do you mean? I was half joking, and you took me up
quite seriously! Why do you ask me whether I believe in God?"

"Oh, no particular reason. I meant to ask you before--many people are
unbelievers nowadays, especially Russians, I have been told. You ought
to know--you've lived abroad."

Rogojin laughed bitterly as he said these words, and opening the door,
held it for the prince to pass out. Muishkin looked surprised, but went
out. The other followed him as far as the landing of the outer stairs,
and shut the door behind him. They both now stood facing one another, as
though oblivious of where they were, or what they had to do next.

"Well, good-bye!" said the prince, holding out his hand.

"Good-bye," said Rogojin, pressing it hard, but quite mechanically.

The prince made one step forward, and then turned round.

"As to faith," he said, smiling, and evidently unwilling to leave
Rogojin in this state--"as to faith, I had four curious conversations
in two days, a week or so ago. One morning I met a man in the train, and
made acquaintance with him at once. I had often heard of him as a very
learned man, but an atheist; and I was very glad of the opportunity of
conversing with so eminent and clever a person. He doesn't believe in
God, and he talked a good deal about it, but all the while it appeared
to me that he was speaking OUTSIDE THE SUBJECT. And it has always struck
me, both in speaking to such men and in reading their books, that they
do not seem really to be touching on that at all, though on the surface
they may appear to do so. I told him this, but I dare say I did not
clearly express what I meant, for he could not understand me.

"That same evening I stopped at a small provincial hotel, and it so
happened that a dreadful murder had been committed there the night
before, and everybody was talking about it. Two peasants--elderly men
and old friends--had had tea together there the night before, and were
to occupy the same bedroom. They were not drunk but one of them had
noticed for the first time that his friend possessed a silver watch
which he was wearing on a chain. He was by no means a thief, and was, as
peasants go, a rich man; but this watch so fascinated him that he could
not restrain himself. He took a knife, and when his friend turned his
back, he came up softly behind, raised his eyes to heaven, crossed
himself, and saying earnestly--'God forgive me, for Christ's sake!' he
cut his friend's throat like a sheep, and took the watch."

Rogojin roared with laughter. He laughed as though he were in a sort of
fit. It was strange to see him laughing so after the sombre mood he had
been in just before.

"Oh, I like that! That beats anything!" he cried convulsively, panting
for breath. "One is an absolute unbeliever; the other is such a
thorough--going believer that he murders his friend to the tune of a
prayer! Oh, prince, prince, that's too good for anything! You can't have
invented it. It's the best thing I've heard!"

"Next morning I went out for a stroll through the town," continued the
prince, so soon as Rogojin was a little quieter, though his laughter
still burst out at intervals, "and soon observed a drunken-looking
soldier staggering about the pavement. He came up to me and said,
'Buy my silver cross, sir! You shall have it for fourpence--it's real
silver.' I looked, and there he held a cross, just taken off his own
neck, evidently, a large tin one, made after the Byzantine pattern. I
fished out fourpence, and put his cross on my own neck, and I could see
by his face that he was as pleased as he could be at the thought that he
had succeeded in cheating a foolish gentleman, and away he went to
drink the value of his cross. At that time everything that I saw made
a tremendous impression upon me. I had understood nothing about Russia
before, and had only vague and fantastic memories of it. So I thought,
'I will wait awhile before I condemn this Judas. Only God knows what may
be hidden in the hearts of drunkards.'

"Well, I went homewards, and near the hotel I came across a poor woman,
carrying a child--a baby of some six weeks old. The mother was quite a
girl herself. The baby was smiling up at her, for the first time in its
life, just at that moment; and while I watched the woman she suddenly
crossed herself, oh, so devoutly! 'What is it, my good woman I asked
her. (I was never but asking questions then!) Exactly as is a mother's
joy when her baby smiles for the first time into her eyes, so is God's
joy when one of His children turns and prays to Him for the first time,
with all his heart!' This is what that poor woman said to me, almost
word for word; and such a deep, refined, truly religious thought it
was--a thought in which the whole essence of Christianity was expressed
in one flash--that is, the recognition of God as our Father, and of
God's joy in men as His own children, which is the chief idea of Christ.
She was a simple country-woman--a mother, it's true--and perhaps, who
knows, she may have been the wife of the drunken soldier!

"Listen, Parfen; you put a question to me just now. This is my reply.
The essence of religious feeling has nothing to do with reason, or
atheism, or crime, or acts of any kind--it has nothing to do with these
things--and never had. There is something besides all this, something
which the arguments of the atheists can never touch. But the principal
thing, and the conclusion of my argument, is that this is most clearly
seen in the heart of a Russian. This is a conviction which I have gained
while I have been in this Russia of ours. Yes, Parfen! there is work to
be done; there is work to be done in this Russian world! Remember what
talks we used to have in Moscow! And I never wished to come here at
all; and I never thought to meet you like this, Parfen! Well,
well--good-bye--good-bye! God be with you!"

He turned and went downstairs.

"Lef Nicolaievitch!" cried Parfen, before he had reached the next
landing. "Have you got that cross you bought from the soldier with you?"

"Yes, I have," and the prince stopped again.

"Show it me, will you?"

A new fancy! The prince reflected, and then mounted the stairs once
more. He pulled out the cross without taking it off his neck.

"Give it to me," said Parfen.

"Why? do you--"

The prince would rather have kept this particular cross.

"I'll wear it; and you shall have mine. I'll take it off at once."

"You wish to exchange crosses? Very well, Parfen, if that's the case,
I'm glad enough--that makes us brothers, you know."

The prince took off his tin cross, Parfen his gold one, and the exchange
was made.

Parfen was silent. With sad surprise the prince observed that the look
of distrust, the bitter, ironical smile, had still not altogether left
his newly-adopted brother's face. At moments, at all events, it showed
itself but too plainly,

At last Rogojin took the prince's hand, and stood so for some moments,
as though he could not make up his mind. Then he drew him along,
murmuring almost inaudibly,

"Come!"

They stopped on the landing, and rang the bell at a door opposite to
Parfen's own lodging.

An old woman opened to them and bowed low to Parfen, who asked her some
questions hurriedly, but did not wait to hear her answer. He led the
prince on through several dark, cold-looking rooms, spotlessly clean,
with white covers over all the furniture.

Without the ceremony of knocking, Parfen entered a small apartment,
furnished like a drawing-room, but with a polished mahogany partition
dividing one half of it from what was probably a bedroom. In one corner
of this room sat an old woman in an arm-chair, close to the stove. She
did not look very old, and her face was a pleasant, round one; but she
was white-haired and, as one could detect at the first glance, quite
in her second childhood. She wore a black woollen dress, with a black
handkerchief round her neck and shoulders, and a white cap with black
ribbons. Her feet were raised on a footstool. Beside her sat another old
woman, also dressed in mourning, and silently knitting a stocking; this
was evidently a companion. They both looked as though they never broke
the silence. The first old woman, so soon as she saw Rogojin and the
prince, smiled and bowed courteously several times, in token of her
gratification at their visit.

"Mother," said Rogojin, kissing her hand, "here is my great friend,
Prince Muishkin; we have exchanged crosses; he was like a real brother
to me at Moscow at one time, and did a great deal for me. Bless him,
mother, as you would bless your own son. Wait a moment, let me arrange
your hands for you."

But the old lady, before Parfen had time to touch her, raised her right
hand, and, with three fingers held up, devoutly made the sign of the
cross three times over the prince. She then nodded her head kindly at
him once more.

"There, come along, Lef Nicolaievitch; that's all I brought you here
for," said Rogojin.

When they reached the stairs again he added:

"She understood nothing of what I said to her, and did not know what I
wanted her to do, and yet she blessed you; that shows she wished to do
so herself. Well, goodbye; it's time you went, and I must go too."

He opened his own door.

"Well, let me at least embrace you and say goodbye, you strange fellow!"
cried the prince, looking with gentle reproach at Rogojin, and advancing
towards him. But the latter had hardly raised his arms when he dropped
them again. He could not make up his mind to it; he turned away from the
prince in order to avoid looking at him. He could not embrace him.

"Don't be afraid," he muttered, indistinctly, "though I have taken your
cross, I shall not murder you for your watch." So saying, he laughed
suddenly, and strangely. Then in a moment his face became transfigured;
he grew deadly white, his lips trembled, his eyes burned like fire. He
stretched out his arms and held the prince tightly to him, and said in a
strangled voice:

"Well, take her! It's Fate! She's yours. I surrender her.... Remember
Rogojin!" And pushing the prince from him, without looking back at him,
he hurriedly entered his own flat, and banged the door.

V.

IT was late now, nearly half-past two, and the prince did not find
General Epanchin at home. He left a card, and determined to look up
Colia, who had a room at a small hotel near. Colia was not in, but he
was informed that he might be back shortly, and had left word that if he
were not in by half-past three it was to be understood that he had gone
to Pavlofsk to General Epanchin's, and would dine there. The prince
decided to wait till half-past three, and ordered some dinner. At
half-past three there was no sign of Colia. The prince waited until four
o'clock, and then strolled off mechanically wherever his feet should
carry him.

In early summer there are often magnificent days in St.
Petersburg--bright, hot and still. This happened to be such a day.

For some time the prince wandered about without aim or object. He did
not know the town well. He stopped to look about him on bridges, at
street corners. He entered a confectioner's shop to rest, once. He was
in a state of nervous excitement and perturbation; he noticed nothing
and no one; and he felt a craving for solitude, to be alone with his
thoughts and his emotions, and to give himself up to them passively. He
loathed the idea of trying to answer the questions that would rise up
in his heart and mind. "I am not to blame for all this," he thought to
himself, half unconsciously.

Towards six o'clock he found himself at the station of the
Tsarsko-Selski railway.

He was tired of solitude now; a new rush of feeling took hold of him,
and a flood of light chased away the gloom, for a moment, from his soul.
He took a ticket to Pavlofsk, and determined to get there as fast as he
could, but something stopped him; a reality, and not a fantasy, as he
was inclined to think it. He was about to take his place in a carriage,
when he suddenly threw away his ticket and came out again, disturbed and
thoughtful. A few moments later, in the street, he recalled something
that had bothered him all the afternoon. He caught himself engaged in
a strange occupation which he now recollected he had taken up at odd
moments for the last few hours--it was looking about all around him for
something, he did not know what. He had forgotten it for a while, half
an hour or so, and now, suddenly, the uneasy search had recommenced.

But he had hardly become conscious of this curious phenomenon, when
another recollection suddenly swam through his brain, interesting him
for the moment, exceedingly. He remembered that the last time he had
been engaged in looking around him for the unknown something, he was
standing before a cutler's shop, in the window of which were exposed
certain goods for sale. He was extremely anxious now to discover whether
this shop and these goods really existed, or whether the whole thing had
been a hallucination.

He felt in a very curious condition today, a condition similar to that
which had preceded his fits in bygone years.

He remembered that at such times he had been particularly absentminded,
and could not discriminate between objects and persons unless he
concentrated special attention upon them.

He remembered seeing something in the window marked at sixty copecks.
Therefore, if the shop existed and if this object were really in
the window, it would prove that he had been able to concentrate his
attention on this article at a moment when, as a general rule,
his absence of mind would have been too great to admit of any such
concentration; in fact, very shortly after he had left the railway
station in such a state of agitation.

So he walked back looking about him for the shop, and his heart beat
with intolerable impatience. Ah! here was the very shop, and there was
the article marked "60 cop." "Of course, it's sixty copecks," he thought,
and certainly worth no more." This idea amused him and he laughed.

But it was a hysterical laugh; he was feeling terribly oppressed. He
remembered clearly that just here, standing before this window, he had
suddenly turned round, just as earlier in the day he had turned and
found the dreadful eyes of Rogojin fixed upon him. Convinced, therefore,
that in this respect at all events he had been under no delusion, he
left the shop and went on.

This must be thought out; it was clear that there had been no
hallucination at the station then, either; something had actually
happened to him, on both occasions; there was no doubt of it. But again
a loathing for all mental exertion overmastered him; he would not
think it out now, he would put it off and think of something else.
He remembered that during his epileptic fits, or rather immediately
preceding them, he had always experienced a moment or two when his whole
heart, and mind, and body seemed to wake up to vigour and light; when
he became filled with joy and hope, and all his anxieties seemed to be
swept away for ever; these moments were but presentiments, as it were,
of the one final second (it was never more than a second) in which the
fit came upon him. That second, of course, was inexpressible. When his
attack was over, and the prince reflected on his symptoms, he used to
say to himself: "These moments, short as they are, when I feel such
extreme consciousness of myself, and consequently more of life than
at other times, are due only to the disease--to the sudden rupture of
normal conditions. Therefore they are not really a higher kind of life,
but a lower." This reasoning, however, seemed to end in a paradox,
and lead to the further consideration:--"What matter though it be only
disease, an abnormal tension of the brain, if when I recall and analyze
the moment, it seems to have been one of harmony and beauty in the
highest degree--an instant of deepest sensation, overflowing with
unbounded joy and rapture, ecstatic devotion, and completest life?"
Vague though this sounds, it was perfectly comprehensible to Muishkin,
though he knew that it was but a feeble expression of his sensations.

That there was, indeed, beauty and harmony in those abnormal moments,
that they really contained the highest synthesis of life, he could not
doubt, nor even admit the possibility of doubt. He felt that they were
not analogous to the fantastic and unreal dreams due to intoxication
by hashish, opium or wine. Of that he could judge, when the attack was
over. These instants were characterized--to define it in a word--by
an intense quickening of the sense of personality. Since, in the last
conscious moment preceding the attack, he could say to himself, with
full understanding of his words: "I would give my whole life for this
one instant," then doubtless to him it really was worth a lifetime.
For the rest, he thought the dialectical part of his argument of little
worth; he saw only too clearly that the result of these ecstatic moments
was stupefaction, mental darkness, idiocy. No argument was possible
on that point. His conclusion, his estimate of the "moment," doubtless
contained some error, yet the reality of the sensation troubled him.
What's more unanswerable than a fact? And this fact had occurred. The
prince had confessed unreservedly to himself that the feeling of intense
beatitude in that crowded moment made the moment worth a lifetime. "I
feel then," he said one day to Rogojin in Moscow, "I feel then as if I
understood those amazing words--'There shall be no more time.'" And he
added with a smile: "No doubt the epileptic Mahomet refers to that same
moment when he says that he visited all the dwellings of Allah, in less
time than was needed to empty his pitcher of water." Yes, he had often
met Rogojin in Moscow, and many were the subjects they discussed. "He
told me I had been a brother to him," thought the prince. "He said so
today, for the first time."

He was sitting in the Summer Garden on a seat under a tree, and his
mind dwelt on the matter. It was about seven o'clock, and the place was
empty. The stifling atmosphere foretold a storm, and the prince felt a
certain charm in the contemplative mood which possessed him. He found
pleasure, too, in gazing at the exterior objects around him. All the
time he was trying to forget some thing, to escape from some idea that
haunted him; but melancholy thoughts came back, though he would so
willingly have escaped from them. He remembered suddenly how he had been
talking to the waiter, while he dined, about a recently committed murder
which the whole town was discussing, and as he thought of it something
strange came over him. He was seized all at once by a violent desire,
almost a temptation, against which he strove in vain.

He jumped up and walked off as fast as he could towards the "Petersburg
Side." [One of the quarters of St. Petersburg.] He had asked someone, a
little while before, to show him which was the Petersburg Side, on the
banks of the Neva. He had not gone there, however; and he knew very
well that it was of no use to go now, for he would certainly not find
Lebedeff's relation at home. He had the address, but she must certainly
have gone to Pavlofsk, or Colia would have let him know. If he were to
go now, it would merely be out of curiosity, but a sudden, new idea had
come into his head.

However, it was something to move on and know where he was going. A
minute later he was still moving on, but without knowing anything. He
could no longer think out his new idea. He tried to take an interest in
all he saw; in the sky, in the Neva. He spoke to some children he met.
He felt his epileptic condition becoming more and more developed. The
evening was very close; thunder was heard some way off.

The prince was haunted all that day by the face of Lebedeff's nephew
whom he had seen for the first time that morning, just as one is haunted
at times by some persistent musical refrain. By a curious association
of ideas, the young man always appeared as the murderer of whom Lebedeff
had spoken when introducing him to Muishkin. Yes, he had read something
about the murder, and that quite recently. Since he came to Russia, he
had heard many stories of this kind, and was interested in them. His
conversation with the waiter, an hour ago, chanced to be on the subject
of this murder of the Zemarins, and the latter had agreed with him about
it. He thought of the waiter again, and decided that he was no fool, but
a steady, intelligent man: though, said he to himself, "God knows
what he may really be; in a country with which one is unfamiliar it is
difficult to understand the people one meets." He was beginning to have
a passionate faith in the Russian soul, however, and what discoveries he
had made in the last six months, what unexpected discoveries! But every
soul is a mystery, and depths of mystery lie in the soul of a Russian.
He had been intimate with Rogojin, for example, and a brotherly
friendship had sprung up between them--yet did he really know him?
What chaos and ugliness fills the world at times! What a self-satisfied
rascal is that nephew of Lebedeff's! "But what am I thinking," continued
the prince to himself. "Can he really have committed that crime? Did he
kill those six persons? I seem to be confusing things... how strange
it all is.... My head goes round... And Lebedeff's daughter--how
sympathetic and charming her face was as she held the child in her arms!
What an innocent look and child-like laugh she had! It is curious that I
had forgotten her until now. I expect Lebedeff adores her--and I really
believe, when I think of it, that as sure as two and two make four, he
is fond of that nephew, too!"

Well, why should he judge them so hastily! Could he really say what they
were, after one short visit? Even Lebedeff seemed an enigma today.
Did he expect to find him so? He had never seen him like that before.
