Lebedeff and the Comtesse du Barry! Good Heavens! If Rogojin should
really kill someone, it would not, at any rate, be such a senseless,
chaotic affair. A knife made to a special pattern, and six people killed
in a kind of delirium. But Rogojin also had a knife made to a special
pattern. Can it be that Rogojin wishes to murder anyone? The prince
began to tremble violently. "It is a crime on my part to imagine
anything so base, with such cynical frankness." His face reddened with
shame at the thought; and then there came across him as in a flash
the memory of the incidents at the Pavlofsk station, and at the other
station in the morning; and the question asked him by Rogojin about
THE EYES and Rogojin's cross, that he was even now wearing; and the
benediction of Rogojin's mother; and his embrace on the darkened
staircase--that last supreme renunciation--and now, to find himself full
of this new "idea," staring into shop-windows, and looking round for
things--how base he was!

Despair overmastered his soul; he would not go on, he would go back to
his hotel; he even turned and went the other way; but a moment after he
changed his mind again and went on in the old direction.

Why, here he was on the Petersburg Side already, quite close to the
house! Where was his "idea"? He was marching along without it now. Yes,
his malady was coming back, it was clear enough; all this gloom and
heaviness, all these "ideas," were nothing more nor less than a fit
coming on; perhaps he would have a fit this very day.

But just now all the gloom and darkness had fled, his heart felt full of
joy and hope, there was no such thing as doubt. And yes, he hadn't
seen her for so long; he really must see her. He wished he could meet
Rogojin; he would take his hand, and they would go to her together. His
heart was pure, he was no rival of Parfen's. Tomorrow, he would go
and tell him that he had seen her. Why, he had only come for the sole
purpose of seeing her, all the way from Moscow! Perhaps she might be
here still, who knows? She might not have gone away to Pavlofsk yet.

Yes, all this must be put straight and above-board, there must be no
more passionate renouncements, such as Rogojin's. It must all be clear
as day. Cannot Rogojin's soul bear the light? He said he did not love
her with sympathy and pity; true, he added that "your pity is greater
than my love," but he was not quite fair on himself there. Kin! Rogojin
reading a book--wasn't that sympathy beginning? Did it not show that he
comprehended his relations with her? And his story of waiting day and
night for her forgiveness? That didn't look quite like passion alone.

And as to her face, could it inspire nothing but passion? Could her
face inspire passion at all now? Oh, it inspired suffering, grief,
overwhelming grief of the soul! A poignant, agonizing memory swept over
the prince's heart.

Yes, agonizing. He remembered how he had suffered that first day when he
thought he observed in her the symptoms of madness. He had almost fallen
into despair. How could he have lost his hold upon her when she ran away
from him to Rogojin? He ought to have run after her himself, rather than
wait for news as he had done. Can Rogojin have failed to observe, up
to now, that she is mad? Rogojin attributes her strangeness to other
causes, to passion! What insane jealousy! What was it he had hinted at
in that suggestion of his? The prince suddenly blushed, and shuddered to
his very heart.

But why recall all this? There was insanity on both sides. For him, the
prince, to love this woman with passion, was unthinkable. It would be
cruel and inhuman. Yes. Rogojin is not fair to himself; he has a large
heart; he has aptitude for sympathy. When he learns the truth, and finds
what a pitiable being is this injured, broken, half-insane creature, he
will forgive her all the torment she has caused him. He will become her
slave, her brother, her friend. Compassion will teach even Rogojin,
it will show him how to reason. Compassion is the chief law of human
existence. Oh, how guilty he felt towards Rogojin! And, for a few warm,
hasty words spoken in Moscow, Parfen had called him "brother," while
he--but no, this was delirium! It would all come right! That gloomy
Parfen had implied that his faith was waning; he must suffer dreadfully.
He said he liked to look at that picture; it was not that he liked
it, but he felt the need of looking at it. Rogojin was not merely a
passionate soul; he was a fighter. He was fighting for the restoration
of his dying faith. He must have something to hold on to and believe,
and someone to believe in. What a strange picture that of Holbein's is!
Why, this is the street, and here's the house, No. 16.

The prince rang the bell, and asked for Nastasia Philipovna. The lady of
the house came out, and stated that Nastasia had gone to stay with Daria
Alexeyevna at Pavlofsk, and might be there some days.

Madame Filisoff was a little woman of forty, with a cunning face, and
crafty, piercing eyes. When, with an air of mystery, she asked her
visitor's name, he refused at first to answer, but in a moment he
changed his mind, and left strict instructions that it should be given
to Nastasia Philipovna. The urgency of his request seemed to impress
Madame Filisoff, and she put on a knowing expression, as if to say, "You
need not be afraid, I quite understand." The prince's name evidently
was a great surprise to her. He stood and looked absently at her for a
moment, then turned, and took the road back to his hotel. But he went
away not as he came. A great change had suddenly come over him. He went
blindly forward; his knees shook under him; he was tormented by "ideas";
his lips were blue, and trembled with a feeble, meaningless smile. His
demon was upon him once more.

What had happened to him? Why was his brow clammy with drops of
moisture, his knees shaking beneath him, and his soul oppressed with a
cold gloom? Was it because he had just seen these dreadful eyes again?
Why, he had left the Summer Garden on purpose to see them; that had been
his "idea." He had wished to assure himself that he would see them once
more at that house. Then why was he so overwhelmed now, having seen them
as he expected? just as though he had not expected to see them! Yes,
they were the very same eyes; and no doubt about it. The same that he
had seen in the crowd that morning at the station, the same that he
had surprised in Rogojin's rooms some hours later, when the latter had
replied to his inquiry with a sneering laugh, "Well, whose eyes were
they?" Then for the third time they had appeared just as he was getting
into the train on his way to see Aglaya. He had had a strong impulse to
rush up to Rogojin, and repeat his words of the morning "Whose eyes
are they?" Instead he had fled from the station, and knew nothing more,
until he found himself gazing into the window of a cutler's shop, and
wondering if a knife with a staghorn handle would cost more than sixty
copecks. And as the prince sat dreaming in the Summer Garden under a
lime-tree, a wicked demon had come and whispered in his car: "Rogojin
has been spying upon you and watching you all the morning in a frenzy
of desperation. When he finds you have not gone to Pavlofsk--a terrible
discovery for him--he will surely go at once to that house in Petersburg
Side, and watch for you there, although only this morning you gave
your word of honour not to see HER, and swore that you had not come to
Petersburg for that purpose." And thereupon the prince had hastened off
to that house, and what was there in the fact that he had met Rogojin
there? He had only seen a wretched, suffering creature, whose state of
mind was gloomy and miserable, but most comprehensible. In the morning
Rogojin had seemed to be trying to keep out of the way; but at the
station this afternoon he had stood out, he had concealed himself,
indeed, less than the prince himself; at the house, now, he had stood
fifty yards off on the other side of the road, with folded hands,
watching, plainly in view and apparently desirous of being seen. He had
stood there like an accuser, like a judge, not like a--a what?

And why had not the prince approached him and spoken to him, instead
of turning away and pretending he had seen nothing, although their eyes
met? (Yes, their eyes had met, and they had looked at each other.) Why,
he had himself wished to take Rogojin by the hand and go in together, he
had himself determined to go to him on the morrow and tell him that he
had seen her, he had repudiated the demon as he walked to the house, and
his heart had been full of joy.

Was there something in the whole aspect of the man, today, sufficient
to justify the prince's terror, and the awful suspicions of his demon?
Something seen, but indescribable, which filled him with dreadful
presentiments? Yes, he was convinced of it--convinced of what? (Oh, how
mean and hideous of him to feel this conviction, this presentiment! How
he blamed himself for it!) "Speak if you dare, and tell me, what is the
presentiment?" he repeated to himself, over and over again. "Put it into
words, speak out clearly and distinctly. Oh, miserable coward that I
am!" The prince flushed with shame for his own baseness. "How shall I
ever look this man in the face again? My God, what a day! And what a
nightmare, what a nightmare!"

There was a moment, during this long, wretched walk back from the
Petersburg Side, when the prince felt an irresistible desire to go
straight to Rogojin's, wait for him, embrace him with tears of shame and
contrition, and tell him of his distrust, and finish with it--once for
all.

But here he was back at his hotel.

How often during the day he had thought of this hotel with loathing--its
corridor, its rooms, its stairs. How he had dreaded coming back to it,
for some reason.

"What a regular old woman I am today," he had said to himself each time,
with annoyance. "I believe in every foolish presentiment that comes into
my head."

He stopped for a moment at the door; a great flush of shame came over
him. "I am a coward, a wretched coward," he said, and moved forward
again; but once more he paused.

Among all the incidents of the day, one recurred to his mind to the
exclusion of the rest; although now that his self-control was regained,
and he was no longer under the influence of a nightmare, he was able
to think of it calmly. It concerned the knife on Rogojin's table. "Why
should not Rogojin have as many knives on his table as he chooses?"
thought the prince, wondering at his suspicions, as he had done when he
found himself looking into the cutler's window. "What could it have to
do with me?" he said to himself again, and stopped as if rooted to the
ground by a kind of paralysis of limb such as attacks people under the
stress of some humiliating recollection.

The doorway was dark and gloomy at any time; but just at this moment
it was rendered doubly so by the fact that the thunder-storm had just
broken, and the rain was coming down in torrents.

And in the semi-darkness the prince distinguished a man standing close
to the stairs, apparently waiting.

There was nothing particularly significant in the fact that a man was
standing back in the doorway, waiting to come out or go upstairs; but
the prince felt an irresistible conviction that he knew this man, and
that it was Rogojin. The man moved on up the stairs; a moment later the
prince passed up them, too. His heart froze within him. "In a minute or
two I shall know all," he thought.

The staircase led to the first and second corridors of the hotel, along
which lay the guests' bedrooms. As is often the case in Petersburg
houses, it was narrow and very dark, and turned around a massive stone
column.

On the first landing, which was as small as the necessary turn of the
stairs allowed, there was a niche in the column, about half a yard wide,
and in this niche the prince felt convinced that a man stood concealed.
He thought he could distinguish a figure standing there. He would pass
by quickly and not look. He took a step forward, but could bear the
uncertainty no longer and turned his head.

The eyes--the same two eyes--met his! The man concealed in the niche had
also taken a step forward. For one second they stood face to face.

Suddenly the prince caught the man by the shoulder and twisted him round
towards the light, so that he might see his face more clearly.

Rogojin's eyes flashed, and a smile of insanity distorted his
countenance. His right hand was raised, and something glittered in it.
The prince did not think of trying to stop it. All he could remember
afterwards was that he seemed to have called out:

"Parfen! I won't believe it."

Next moment something appeared to burst open before him: a wonderful
inner light illuminated his soul. This lasted perhaps half a second, yet
he distinctly remembered hearing the beginning of the wail, the strange,
dreadful wail, which burst from his lips of its own accord, and which no
effort of will on his part could suppress.

Next moment he was absolutely unconscious; black darkness blotted out
everything.

He had fallen in an epileptic fit.


*****


As is well known, these fits occur instantaneously. The face, especially
the eyes, become terribly disfigured, convulsions seize the limbs, a
terrible cry breaks from the sufferer, a wail from which everything
human seems to be blotted out, so that it is impossible to believe that
the man who has just fallen is the same who emitted the dreadful cry.
It seems more as though some other being, inside the stricken one,
had cried. Many people have borne witness to this impression; and many
cannot behold an epileptic fit without a feeling of mysterious terror
and dread.

Such a feeling, we must suppose, overtook Rogojin at this moment, and
saved the prince's life. Not knowing that it was a fit, and seeing
his victim disappear head foremost into the darkness, hearing his head
strike the stone steps below with a crash, Rogojin rushed downstairs,
skirting the body, and flung himself headlong out of the hotel, like a
raving madman.

The prince's body slipped convulsively down the steps till it rested at
the bottom. Very soon, in five minutes or so, he was discovered, and a
crowd collected around him.

A pool of blood on the steps near his head gave rise to grave fears. Was
it a case of accident, or had there been a crime? It was, however, soon
recognized as a case of epilepsy, and identification and proper measures
for restoration followed one another, owing to a fortunate circumstance.
Colia Ivolgin had come back to his hotel about seven o'clock, owing to
a sudden impulse which made him refuse to dine at the Epanchins',
and, finding a note from the prince awaiting him, had sped away to the
latter's address. Arrived there, he ordered a cup of tea and sat sipping
it in the coffee-room. While there he heard excited whispers of someone
just found at the bottom of the stairs in a fit; upon which he had
hurried to the spot, with a presentiment of evil, and at once recognized
the prince.

The sufferer was immediately taken to his room, and though he partially
regained consciousness, he lay long in a semi-dazed condition.

The doctor stated that there was no danger to be apprehended from the
wound on the head, and as soon as the prince could understand what
was going on around him, Colia hired a carriage and took him away
to Lebedeff's. There he was received with much cordiality, and the
departure to the country was hastened on his account. Three days later
they were all at Pavlofsk.

VI.

LEBEDEFF'S country-house was not large, but it was pretty and
convenient, especially the part which was let to the prince.

A row of orange and lemon trees and jasmines, planted in green tubs,
stood on the fairly wide terrace. According to Lebedeff, these trees
gave the house a most delightful aspect. Some were there when he bought
it, and he was so charmed with the effect that he promptly added to
their number. When the tubs containing these plants arrived at the villa
and were set in their places, Lebedeff kept running into the street to
enjoy the view of the house, and every time he did so the rent to be
demanded from the future tenant went up with a bound.

This country villa pleased the prince very much in his state of physical
and mental exhaustion. On the day that they left for Pavlofsk, that is
the day after his attack, he appeared almost well, though in reality he
felt very far from it. The faces of those around him for the last three
days had made a pleasant impression. He was pleased to see, not only
Colia, who had become his inseparable companion, but Lebedeff himself
and all the family, except the nephew, who had left the house. He was
also glad to receive a visit from General Ivolgin, before leaving St.
Petersburg.

It was getting late when the party arrived at Pavlofsk, but several
people called to see the prince, and assembled in the verandah. Gania
was the first to arrive. He had grown so pale and thin that the prince
could hardly recognize him. Then came Varia and Ptitsin, who were
rusticating in the neighbourhood. As to General Ivolgin, he scarcely
budged from Lebedeff's house, and seemed to have moved to Pavlofsk with
him. Lebedeff did his best to keep Ardalion Alexandrovitch by him, and
to prevent him from invading the prince's quarters. He chatted with
him confidentially, so that they might have been taken for old friends.
During those three days the prince had noticed that they frequently held
long conversations; he often heard their voices raised in argument on
deep and learned subjects, which evidently pleased Lebedeff. He seemed
as if he could not do without the general. But it was not only Ardalion
Alexandrovitch whom Lebedeff kept out of the prince's way. Since they
had come to the villa, he treated his own family the same. Upon the
pretext that his tenant needed quiet, he kept him almost in isolation,
and Muishkin protested in vain against this excess of zeal. Lebedeff
stamped his feet at his daughters and drove them away if they attempted
to join the prince on the terrace; not even Vera was excepted.

"They will lose all respect if they are allowed to be so free and easy;
besides it is not proper for them," he declared at last, in answer to a
direct question from the prince.

"Why on earth not?" asked the latter. "Really, you know, you are making
yourself a nuisance, by keeping guard over me like this. I get bored
all by myself; I have told you so over and over again, and you get on
my nerves more than ever by waving your hands and creeping in and out in
the mysterious way you do."

It was a fact that Lebedeff, though he was so anxious to keep everyone
else from disturbing the patient, was continually in and out of the
prince's room himself. He invariably began by opening the door a crack
and peering in to see if the prince was there, or if he had escaped;
then he would creep softly up to the arm-chair, sometimes making
Muishkin jump by his sudden appearance. He always asked if the patient
wanted anything, and when the latter replied that he only wanted to be
left in peace, he would turn away obediently and make for the door on
tip-toe, with deprecatory gestures to imply that he had only just looked
in, that he would not speak a word, and would go away and not intrude
again; which did not prevent him from reappearing in ten minutes or
a quarter of an hour. Colia had free access to the prince, at which
Lebedeff was quite disgusted and indignant. He would listen at the door
for half an hour at a time while the two were talking. Colia found this
out, and naturally told the prince of his discovery.

"Do you think yourself my master, that you try to keep me under lock and
key like this?" said the prince to Lebedeff. "In the country, at least,
I intend to be free, and you may make up your mind that I mean to see
whom I like, and go where I please."

"Why, of course," replied the clerk, gesticulating with his hands.

The prince looked him sternly up and down.

"Well, Lukian Timofeyovitch, have you brought the little cupboard that
you had at the head of your bed with you here?"

"No, I left it where it was."

"Impossible!"

"It cannot be moved; you would have to pull the wall down, it is so
firmly fixed."

"Perhaps you have one like it here?"

"I have one that is even better, much better; that is really why I
bought this house."

"Ah! What visitor did you turn away from my door, about an hour ago?"

"The-the general. I would not let him in; there is no need for him to
visit you, prince... I have the deepest esteem for him, he is a--a great
man. You don't believe it? Well, you will see, and yet, most excellent
prince, you had much better not receive him."

"May I ask why? and also why you walk about on tiptoe and always seem as
if you were going to whisper a secret in my ear whenever you come near
me?"

"I am vile, vile; I know it!" cried Lebedeff, beating his breast with a
contrite air. "But will not the general be too hospitable for you?"

"Too hospitable?"

"Yes. First, he proposes to come and live in my house. Well and good;
but he sticks at nothing; he immediately makes himself one of the
family. We have talked over our respective relations several times, and
discovered that we are connected by marriage. It seems also that you are
a sort of nephew on his mother's side; he was explaining it to me again
only yesterday. If you are his nephew, it follows that I must also be a
relation of yours, most excellent prince. Never mind about that, it is
only a foible; but just now he assured me that all his life, from the
day he was made an ensign to the 11th of last June, he has entertained
at least two hundred guests at his table every day. Finally, he went so
far as to say that they never rose from the table; they dined, supped,
and had tea, for fifteen hours at a stretch. This went on for thirty
years without a break; there was barely time to change the table-cloth;
directly one person left, another took his place. On feast-days he
entertained as many as three hundred guests, and they numbered seven
hundred on the thousandth anniversary of the foundation of the Russian
Empire. It amounts to a passion with him; it makes one uneasy to hear of
it. It is terrible to have to entertain people who do things on such a
scale. That is why I wonder whether such a man is not too hospitable for
you and me."

"But you seem to be on the best of terms with him?"

"Quite fraternal--I look upon it as a joke. Let us be brothers-in-law,
it is all the same to me,--rather an honour than not. But in spite of
the two hundred guests and the thousandth anniversary of the Russian
Empire, I can see that he is a very remarkable man. I am quite sincere.
You said just now that I always looked as if I was going to tell you a
secret; you are right. I have a secret to tell you: a certain person has
just let me know that she is very anxious for a secret interview with
you."

"Why should it be secret? Not at all; I will call on her myself
tomorrow."

"No, oh no!" cried Lebedeff, waving his arms; "if she is afraid, it is
not for the reason you think. By the way, do you know that the monster
comes every day to inquire after your health?"

"You call him a monster so often that it makes me suspicious."

"You must have no suspicions, none whatever," said Lebedeff quickly. "I
only want you to know that the person in question is not afraid of him,
but of something quite, quite different."

"What on earth is she afraid of, then? Tell me plainly, without any more
beating about the bush," said the prince, exasperated by the other's
mysterious grimaces.

"Ah that is the secret," said Lebedeff, with a smile.

"Whose secret?"

"Yours. You forbade me yourself to mention it before you, most excellent
prince," murmured Lebedeff. Then, satisfied that he had worked up
Muishkin's curiosity to the highest pitch, he added abruptly: "She is
afraid of Aglaya Ivanovna."

The prince frowned for a moment in silence, and then said suddenly:

"Really, Lebedeff, I must leave your house. Where are Gavrila
Ardalionovitch and the Ptitsins? Are they here? Have you chased them
away, too?"

"They are coming, they are coming; and the general as well. I will open
all the doors; I will call all my daughters, all of them, this very
minute," said Lebedeff in a low voice, thoroughly frightened, and waving
his hands as he ran from door to door.

At that moment Colia appeared on the terrace; he announced that
Lizabetha Prokofievna and her three daughters were close behind him.

Moved by this news, Lebedeff hurried up to the prince.

"Shall I call the Ptitsins, and Gavrila Ardalionovitch? Shall I let the
general in?" he asked.

"Why not? Let in anyone who wants to see me. I assure you, Lebedeff, you
have misunderstood my position from the very first; you have been wrong
all along. I have not the slightest reason to hide myself from anyone,"
replied the prince gaily.

Seeing him laugh, Lebedeff thought fit to laugh also, and though much
agitated his satisfaction was quite visible.

Colia was right; the Epanchin ladies were only a few steps behind him.
As they approached the terrace other visitors appeared from Lebedeff's
side of the house-the Ptitsins, Gania, and Ardalion Alexandrovitch.

The Epanchins had only just heard of the prince's illness and of his
presence in Pavlofsk, from Colia; and up to this time had been in a
state of considerable bewilderment about him. The general brought the
prince's card down from town, and Mrs. Epanchin had felt convinced that
he himself would follow his card at once; she was much excited.

In vain the girls assured her that a man who had not written for six
months would not be in such a dreadful hurry, and that probably he had
enough to do in town without needing to bustle down to Pavlofsk to see
them. Their mother was quite angry at the very idea of such a thing, and
announced her absolute conviction that he would turn up the next day at
latest.

So next day the prince was expected all the morning, and at dinner, tea,
and supper; and when he did not appear in the evening, Mrs. Epanchin
quarrelled with everyone in the house, finding plenty of pretexts
without so much as mentioning the prince's name.

On the third day there was no talk of him at all, until Aglaya remarked
at dinner: "Mamma is cross because the prince hasn't turned up," to
which the general replied that it was not his fault.

Mrs. Epanchin misunderstood the observation, and rising from her place
she left the room in majestic wrath. In the evening, however, Colia came
with the story of the prince's adventures, so far as he knew them. Mrs.
Epanchin was triumphant; although Colia had to listen to a long lecture.
"He idles about here the whole day long, one can't get rid of him; and
then when he is wanted he does not come. He might have sent a line if he
did not wish to inconvenience himself."

At the words "one can't get rid of him," Colia was very angry, and
nearly flew into a rage; but he resolved to be quiet for the time and
show his resentment later. If the words had been less offensive he
might have forgiven them, so pleased was he to see Lizabetha Prokofievna
worried and anxious about the prince's illness.

She would have insisted on sending to Petersburg at once, for a certain
great medical celebrity; but her daughters dissuaded her, though they
were not willing to stay behind when she at once prepared to go and
visit the invalid. Aglaya, however, suggested that it was a little
unceremonious to go en masse to see him.

"Very well then, stay at home," said Mrs. Epanchin, "and a good thing
too, for Evgenie Pavlovitch is coming down and there will be no one at
home to receive him."

Of course, after this, Aglaya went with the rest. In fact, she had never
had the slightest intention of doing otherwise.

Prince S., who was in the house, was requested to escort the ladies.
He had been much interested when he first heard of the prince from the
Epanchins. It appeared that they had known one another before, and had
spent some time together in a little provincial town three months
ago. Prince S. had greatly taken to him, and was delighted with the
opportunity of meeting him again.

The general had not come down from town as yet, nor had Evgenie
Pavlovitch arrived.

It was not more than two or three hundred yards from the Epanchins'
house to Lebedeff's. The first disagreeable impression experienced by
Mrs. Epanchin was to find the prince surrounded by a whole assembly of
other guests--not to mention the fact that some of those present were
particularly detestable in her eyes. The next annoying circumstance was
when an apparently strong and healthy young fellow, well dressed,
and smiling, came forward to meet her on the terrace, instead of the
half-dying unfortunate whom she had expected to see.

She was astonished and vexed, and her disappointment pleased Colia
immensely. Of course he could have undeceived her before she started,
but the mischievous boy had been careful not to do that, foreseeing the
probably laughable disgust that she would experience when she found her
dear friend, the prince, in good health. Colia was indelicate enough to
voice the delight he felt at his success in managing to annoy Lizabetha
Prokofievna, with whom, in spite of their really amicable relations, he
was constantly sparring.

"Just wait a while, my boy!" said she; "don't be too certain of your
triumph." And she sat down heavily, in the arm-chair pushed forward by
the prince.

Lebedeff, Ptitsin, and General Ivolgin hastened to find chairs for
the young ladies. Varia greeted them joyfully, and they exchanged
confidences in ecstatic whispers.

"I must admit, prince, I was a little put out to see you up and about
like this--I expected to find you in bed; but I give you my word, I was
only annoyed for an instant, before I collected my thoughts properly. I
am always wiser on second thoughts, and I dare say you are the same.
I assure you I am as glad to see you well as though you were my own
son,--yes, and more; and if you don't believe me the more shame to you,
and it's not my fault. But that spiteful boy delights in playing all
sorts of tricks. You are his patron, it seems. Well, I warn you that
one fine morning I shall deprive myself of the pleasure of his further
acquaintance."

"What have I done wrong now?" cried Colia. "What was the good of telling
you that the prince was nearly well again? You would not have believed
me; it was so much more interesting to picture him on his death-bed."

"How long do you remain here, prince?" asked Madame Epanchin.

"All the summer, and perhaps longer."

"You are alone, aren't you,--not married?"

"No, I'm not married!" replied the prince, smiling at the ingenuousness
of this little feeler.

"Oh, you needn't laugh! These things do happen, you know! Now then--why
didn't you come to us? We have a wing quite empty. But just as you like,
of course. Do you lease it from HIM?--this fellow, I mean," she added,
nodding towards Lebedeff. "And why does he always wriggle so?"

At that moment Vera, carrying the baby in her arms as usual, came out of
the house, on to the terrace. Lebedeff kept fidgeting among the chairs,
and did not seem to know what to do with himself, though he had no
intention of going away. He no sooner caught sight of his daughter, than
he rushed in her direction, waving his arms to keep her away; he even
forgot himself so far as to stamp his foot.

"Is he mad?" asked Madame Epanchin suddenly.

"No, he..."

"Perhaps he is drunk? Your company is rather peculiar," she added, with
a glance at the other guests....

"But what a pretty girl! Who is she?"

"That is Lebedeff's daughter--Vera Lukianovna."

"Indeed? She looks very sweet. I should like to make her acquaintance."

The words were hardly out of her mouth, when Lebedeff dragged Vera
forward, in order to present her.

"Orphans, poor orphans!" he began in a pathetic voice.

"The child she carries is an orphan, too. She is Vera's sister, my
daughter Luboff. The day this babe was born, six weeks ago, my wife
died, by the will of God Almighty.... Yes... Vera takes her mother's
place, though she is but her sister... nothing more... nothing more..."

"And you! You are nothing more than a fool, if you'll excuse me! Well!
well! you know that yourself, I expect," said the lady indignantly.

Lebedeff bowed low. "It is the truth," he replied, with extreme respect.

"Oh, Mr. Lebedeff, I am told you lecture on the Apocalypse. Is it true?"
asked Aglaya.

"Yes, that is so... for the last fifteen years."

"I have heard of you, and I think read of you in the newspapers."

"No, that was another commentator, whom the papers named. He is dead,
however, and I have taken his place," said the other, much delighted.

"We are neighbours, so will you be so kind as to come over one day and
explain the Apocalypse to me?" said Aglaya. "I do not understand it in
the least."

"Allow me to warn you," interposed General Ivolgin, "that he is the
greatest charlatan on earth." He had taken the chair next to the girl,
and was impatient to begin talking. "No doubt there are pleasures and
amusements peculiar to the country," he continued, "and to listen to a
pretended student holding forth on the book of the Revelations may be
as good as any other. It may even be original. But... you seem to
be looking at me with some surprise--may I introduce myself--General
Ivolgin--I carried you in my arms as a baby--"

"Delighted, I'm sure," said Aglaya; "I am acquainted with Varvara
Ardalionovna and Nina Alexandrovna." She was trying hard to restrain
herself from laughing.

Mrs. Epanchin flushed up; some accumulation of spleen in her suddenly
needed an outlet. She could not bear this General Ivolgin whom she had
once known, long ago--in society.

"You are deviating from the truth, sir, as usual!" she remarked, boiling
over with indignation; "you never carried her in your life!"

"You have forgotten, mother," said Aglaya, suddenly. "He really did
carry me about,--in Tver, you know. I was six years old, I remember.
He made me a bow and arrow, and I shot a pigeon. Don't you remember
shooting a pigeon, you and I, one day?"

"Yes, and he made me a cardboard helmet, and a little wooden sword--I
remember!" said Adelaida.

"Yes, I remember too!" said Alexandra. "You quarrelled about the wounded
pigeon, and Adelaida was put in the corner, and stood there with her
helmet and sword and all."

The poor general had merely made the remark about having carried Aglaya
in his arms because he always did so begin a conversation with young
people. But it happened that this time he had really hit upon the truth,
though he had himself entirely forgotten the fact. But when Adelaida and
Aglaya recalled the episode of the pigeon, his mind became filled
with memories, and it is impossible to describe how this poor old man,
usually half drunk, was moved by the recollection.

"I remember--I remember it all!" he cried. "I was captain then. You were
such a lovely little thing--Nina Alexandrovna!--Gania, listen! I was
received then by General Epanchin."

"Yes, and look what you have come to now!" interrupted Mrs. Epanchin.
"However, I see you have not quite drunk your better feelings away. But
you've broken your wife's heart, sir--and instead of looking after
your children, you have spent your time in public-houses and debtors'
prisons! Go away, my friend, stand in some corner and weep, and bemoan
your fallen dignity, and perhaps God will forgive you yet! Go, go! I'm
serious! There's nothing so favourable for repentance as to think of the
past with feelings of remorse!"

There was no need to repeat that she was serious. The general, like all
drunkards, was extremely emotional and easily touched by recollections
of his better days. He rose and walked quietly to the door, so meekly
that Mrs. Epanchin was instantly sorry for him.

"Ardalion Alexandrovitch," she cried after him, "wait a moment, we are
all sinners! When you feel that your conscience reproaches you a little
less, come over to me and we'll have a talk about the past! I dare say I
am fifty times more of a sinner than you are! And now go, go, good-bye,
you had better not stay here!" she added, in alarm, as he turned as
though to come back.

"Don't go after him just now, Colia, or he'll be vexed, and the benefit
of this moment will be lost!" said the prince, as the boy was hurrying
out of the room.

"Quite true! Much better to go in half an hour or so said Mrs. Epanchin.

"That's what comes of telling the truth for once in one's life!" said
Lebedeff. "It reduced him to tears."

"Come, come! the less YOU say about it the better--to judge from all I
have heard about you!" replied Mrs. Epanchin.

The prince took the first opportunity of informing the Epanchin ladies
that he had intended to pay them a visit that day, if they had not
themselves come this afternoon, and Lizabetha Prokofievna replied that
she hoped he would still do so.

By this time some of the visitors had disappeared.

Ptitsin had tactfully retreated to Lebedeff's wing; and Gania soon
followed him.

The latter had behaved modestly, but with dignity, on this occasion
of his first meeting with the Epanchins since the rupture. Twice Mrs.
Epanchin had deliberately examined him from head to foot; but he had
stood fire without flinching. He was certainly much changed, as anyone
could see who had not met him for some time; and this fact seemed to
afford Aglaya a good deal of satisfaction.

"That was Gavrila Ardalionovitch, who just went out, wasn't it?" she
asked suddenly, interrupting somebody else's conversation to make the
remark.

"Yes, it was," said the prince.

"I hardly knew him; he is much changed, and for the better!"

"I am very glad," said the prince.

"He has been very ill," added Varia.

"How has he changed for the better?" asked Mrs. Epanchin. "I don't see
any change for the better! What's better in him? Where did you get THAT
idea from? WHAT'S better?"

"There's nothing better than the 'poor knight'!" said Colia, who was
standing near the last speaker's chair.

"I quite agree with you there!" said Prince S., laughing.

"So do I," said Adelaida, solemnly.

"WHAT poor knight?" asked Mrs. Epanchin, looking round at the face of
each of the speakers in turn. Seeing, however, that Aglaya was blushing,
she added, angrily:

"What nonsense you are all talking! What do you mean by poor knight?"

"It's not the first time this urchin, your favourite, has shown his
impudence by twisting other people's words," said Aglaya, haughtily.

Every time that Aglaya showed temper (and this was very often), there
was so much childish pouting, such "school-girlishness," as it were, in
her apparent wrath, that it was impossible to avoid smiling at her, to
her own unutterable indignation. On these occasions she would say, "How
can they, how DARE they laugh at me?"

This time everyone laughed at her, her sisters, Prince S., Prince
Muishkin (though he himself had flushed for some reason), and Colia.
Aglaya was dreadfully indignant, and looked twice as pretty in her
wrath.

"He's always twisting round what one says," she cried.

"I am only repeating your own exclamation!" said Colia. "A month ago you
were turning over the pages of your Don Quixote, and suddenly called out
'there is nothing better than the poor knight.' I don't know whom
you were referring to, of course, whether to Don Quixote, or Evgenie
Pavlovitch, or someone else, but you certainly said these words, and
afterwards there was a long conversation..."

"You are inclined to go a little too far, my good boy, with your
guesses," said Mrs. Epanchin, with some show of annoyance.

"But it's not I alone," cried Colia. "They all talked about it, and they
do still. Why, just now Prince S. and Adelaida Ivanovna declared that
they upheld 'the poor knight'; so evidently there does exist a 'poor
knight'; and if it were not for Adelaida Ivanovna, we should have known
long ago who the 'poor knight' was."

"Why, how am I to blame?" asked Adelaida, smiling.

"You wouldn't draw his portrait for us, that's why you are to blame!
Aglaya Ivanovna asked you to draw his portrait, and gave you the whole
subject of the picture. She invented it herself; and you wouldn't."

"What was I to draw? According to the lines she quoted:

"'From his face he never lifted That eternal mask of steel.'"

"What sort of a face was I to draw? I couldn't draw a mask."

"I don't know what you are driving at; what mask do you mean?" said
Mrs. Epanchin, irritably. She began to see pretty clearly though what
it meant, and whom they referred to by the generally accepted title of
"poor knight." But what specially annoyed her was that the prince was
looking so uncomfortable, and blushing like a ten-year-old child.

"Well, have you finished your silly joke?" she added, "and am I to be
told what this 'poor knight' means, or is it a solemn secret which
cannot be approached lightly?"

But they all laughed on.

"It's simply that there is a Russian poem," began Prince S., evidently
anxious to change the conversation, "a strange thing, without beginning
or end, and all about a 'poor knight.' A month or so ago, we were all
talking and laughing, and looking up a subject for one of Adelaida's
pictures--you know it is the principal business of this family to find
subjects for Adelaida's pictures. Well, we happened upon this 'poor
knight.' I don't remember who thought of it first--"

"Oh! Aglaya Ivanovna did," said Colia.

"Very likely--I don't recollect," continued Prince S.

"Some of us laughed at the subject; some liked it; but she declared
that, in order to make a picture of the gentleman, she must first see
his face. We then began to think over all our friends' faces to see
if any of them would do, and none suited us, and so the matter stood;
that's all. I don't know why Nicolai Ardalionovitch has brought up
the joke now. What was appropriate and funny then, has quite lost all
interest by this time."

"Probably there's some new silliness about it," said Mrs. Epanchin,
sarcastically.

"There is no silliness about it at all--only the profoundest respect,"
said Aglaya, very seriously. She had quite recovered her temper; in
fact, from certain signs, it was fair to conclude that she was delighted
to see this joke going so far; and a careful observer might have
remarked that her satisfaction dated from the moment when the fact of
the prince's confusion became apparent to all.

"'Profoundest respect!' What nonsense! First, insane giggling, and then,
all of a sudden, a display of 'profoundest respect.' Why respect? Tell
me at once, why have you suddenly developed this 'profound respect,'
eh?"

"Because," replied Aglaya gravely, "in the poem the knight is described
as a man capable of living up to an ideal all his life. That sort of
thing is not to be found every day among the men of our times. In the
poem it is not stated exactly what the ideal was, but it was evidently
some vision, some revelation of pure Beauty, and the knight wore round
his neck, instead of a scarf, a rosary. A device--A. N. B.--the meaning
of which is not explained, was inscribed on his shield--"

"No, A. N. D.," corrected Colia.

"I say A. N. B., and so it shall be!" cried Aglaya, irritably. "Anyway,
the 'poor knight' did not care what his lady was, or what she did. He
had chosen his ideal, and he was bound to serve her, and break lances
for her, and acknowledge her as the ideal of pure Beauty, whatever she
might say or do afterwards. If she had taken to stealing, he would have
championed her just the same. I think the poet desired to embody in this
one picture the whole spirit of medieval chivalry and the platonic love
of a pure and high-souled knight. Of course it's all an ideal, and in
the 'poor knight' that spirit reached the utmost limit of asceticism. He
is a Don Quixote, only serious and not comical. I used not to understand
him, and laughed at him, but now I love the 'poor knight,' and respect
his actions."

So ended Aglaya; and, to look at her, it was difficult, indeed, to judge
whether she was joking or in earnest.

"Pooh! he was a fool, and his actions were the actions of a fool," said
Mrs. Epanchin; "and as for you, young woman, you ought to know better.
At all events, you are not to talk like that again. What poem is it?
Recite it! I want to hear this poem! I have hated poetry all my life.
Prince, you must excuse this nonsense. We neither of us like this sort
of thing! Be patient!"

They certainly were put out, both of them.

The prince tried to say something, but he was too confused, and could
not get his words out. Aglaya, who had taken such liberties in her
little speech, was the only person present, perhaps, who was not in the
least embarrassed. She seemed, in fact, quite pleased.

She now rose solemnly from her seat, walked to the centre of the
terrace, and stood in front of the prince's chair. All looked on with
some surprise, and Prince S. and her sisters with feelings of decided
alarm, to see what new frolic she was up to; it had gone quite far
enough already, they thought. But Aglaya evidently thoroughly enjoyed
the affectation and ceremony with which she was introducing her
recitation of the poem.

Mrs. Epanchin was just wondering whether she would not forbid the
performance after all, when, at the very moment that Aglaya commenced
her declamation, two new guests, both talking loudly, entered from the
street. The new arrivals were General Epanchin and a young man.

Their entrance caused some slight commotion.

VII.

THE young fellow accompanying the general was about twenty-eight, tall,
and well built, with a handsome and clever face, and bright black eyes,
full of fun and intelligence.

Aglaya did not so much as glance at the new arrivals, but went on with
her recitation, gazing at the prince the while in an affected manner,
and at him alone. It was clear to him that she was doing all this with
some special object.

But the new guests at least somewhat eased his strained and
uncomfortable position. Seeing them approaching, he rose from his chair,
and nodding amicably to the general, signed to him not to interrupt the
recitation. He then got behind his chair, and stood there with his left
hand resting on the back of it. Thanks to this change of position,
he was able to listen to the ballad with far less embarrassment than
before. Mrs. Epanchin had also twice motioned to the new arrivals to be
quiet, and stay where they were.

The prince was much interested in the young man who had just entered. He
easily concluded that this was Evgenie Pavlovitch Radomski, of whom he
had already heard mention several times. He was puzzled, however, by the
young man's plain clothes, for he had always heard of Evgenie Pavlovitch
as a military man. An ironical smile played on Evgenie's lips all the
while the recitation was proceeding, which showed that he, too, was
probably in the secret of the 'poor knight' joke. But it had become
quite a different matter with Aglaya. All the affectation of manner
which she had displayed at the beginning disappeared as the ballad
proceeded. She spoke the lines in so serious and exalted a manner, and
with so much taste, that she even seemed to justify the exaggerated
solemnity with which she had stepped forward. It was impossible to
discern in her now anything but a deep feeling for the spirit of the
poem which she had undertaken to interpret.

Her eyes were aglow with inspiration, and a slight tremor of rapture
passed over her lovely features once or twice. She continued to recite:

"Once there came a vision glorious, Mystic, dreadful, wondrous fair;
Burned itself into his spirit, And abode for ever there!

"Never more--from that sweet moment--Gazed he on womankind; He was dumb
to love and wooing And to all their graces blind.

"Full of love for that sweet vision, Brave and pure he took the field;
With his blood he stained the letters N. P. B. upon his shield.

"'Lumen caeli, sancta Rosa!' Shouting on the foe he fell, And like
thunder rang his war-cry O'er the cowering infidel.

"Then within his distant castle, Home returned, he dreamed his
days-Silent, sad,--and when death took him He was mad, the legend says."

When recalling all this afterwards the prince could not for the life of
him understand how to reconcile the beautiful, sincere, pure nature of
the girl with the irony of this jest. That it was a jest there was no
doubt whatever; he knew that well enough, and had good reason, too,
for his conviction; for during her recitation of the ballad Aglaya had
deliberately changed the letters A. N. B. into N. P. B. He was quite
sure she had not done this by accident, and that his ears had not
deceived him. At all events her performance--which was a joke, of
course, if rather a crude one,--was premeditated. They had evidently
talked (and laughed) over the 'poor knight' for more than a month.

Yet Aglaya had brought out these letters N. P. B. not only without the
slightest appearance of irony, or even any particular accentuation, but
with so even and unbroken an appearance of seriousness that assuredly
anyone might have supposed that these initials were the original ones
written in the ballad. The thing made an uncomfortable impression upon
the prince. Of course Mrs. Epanchin saw nothing either in the change of
initials or in the insinuation embodied therein. General Epanchin only
knew that there was a recitation of verses going on, and took no further
interest in the matter. Of the rest of the audience, many had understood
the allusion and wondered both at the daring of the lady and at the
motive underlying it, but tried to show no sign of their feelings. But
Evgenie Pavlovitch (as the prince was ready to wager) both comprehended
and tried his best to show that he comprehended; his smile was too
mocking to leave any doubt on that point.

"How beautiful that is!" cried Mrs. Epanchin, with sincere admiration.
"Whose is it?"

"Pushkin's, mama, of course! Don't disgrace us all by showing your
ignorance," said Adelaida.

"As soon as we reach home give it to me to read."

"I don't think we have a copy of Pushkin in the house."

"There are a couple of torn volumes somewhere; they have been lying
about from time immemorial," added Alexandra.

"Send Feodor or Alexey up by the very first train to buy a copy,
then.--Aglaya, come here--kiss me, dear, you recited beautifully! but,"
she added in a whisper, "if you were sincere I am sorry for you. If it
was a joke, I do not approve of the feelings which prompted you to do
it, and in any case you would have done far better not to recite it at
all. Do you understand?--Now come along, young woman; we've sat here too
long. I'll speak to you about this another time."

Meanwhile the prince took the opportunity of greeting General Epanchin,
and the general introduced Evgenie Pavlovitch to him.

"I caught him up on the way to your house," explained the general. "He
had heard that we were all here."

"Yes, and I heard that you were here, too," added Evgenie Pavlovitch;
"and since I had long promised myself the pleasure of seeking not only
your acquaintance but your friendship, I did not wish to waste time, but
came straight on. I am sorry to hear that you are unwell."

"Oh, but I'm quite well now, thank you, and very glad to make your
acquaintance. Prince S. has often spoken to me about you," said
Muishkin, and for an instant the two men looked intently into one
another's eyes.

The prince remarked that Evgenie Pavlovitch's plain clothes had
evidently made a great impression upon the company present, so much so
that all other interests seemed to be effaced before this surprising
fact.

His change of dress was evidently a matter of some importance. Adelaida
and Alexandra poured out a stream of questions; Prince S., a relative
of the young man, appeared annoyed; and Ivan Fedorovitch quite excited.
Aglaya alone was not interested. She merely looked closely at Evgenie
for a minute, curious perhaps as to whether civil or military clothes
became him best, then turned away and paid no more attention to him or
his costume. Lizabetha Prokofievna asked no questions, but it was clear
that she was uneasy, and the prince fancied that Evgenie was not in her
good graces.

"He has astonished me," said Ivan Fedorovitch. "I nearly fell down with
surprise. I could hardly believe my eyes when I met him in Petersburg
just now. Why this haste? That's what I want to know. He has always said
himself that there is no need to break windows."

Evgenie Pavlovitch remarked here that he had spoken of his intention of
leaving the service long ago. He had, however, always made more or less
of a joke about it, so no one had taken him seriously. For that matter
he joked about everything, and his friends never knew what to believe,
especially if he did not wish them to understand him.

"I have only retired for a time," said he, laughing. "For a few months;
at most for a year."

"But there is no necessity for you to retire at all," complained the
general, "as far as I know."

"I want to go and look after my country estates. You advised me to do
that yourself," was the reply. "And then I wish to go abroad."

After a few more expostulations, the conversation drifted into other
channels, but the prince, who had been an attentive listener, thought
all this excitement about so small a matter very curious. "There must be
more in it than appears," he said to himself.

"I see the 'poor knight' has come on the scene again," said Evgenie
Pavlovitch, stepping to Aglaya's side.

To the amazement of the prince, who overheard the remark, Aglaya looked
haughtily and inquiringly at the questioner, as though she would give
him to know, once for all, that there could be no talk between them
about the 'poor knight,' and that she did not understand his question.

"But not now! It is too late to send to town for a Pushkin now. It is
much too late, I say!" Colia was exclaiming in a loud voice. "I have
told you so at least a hundred times."

"Yes, it is really much too late to send to town now," said Evgenie
Pavlovitch, who had escaped from Aglaya as rapidly as possible. "I am
sure the shops are shut in Petersburg; it is past eight o'clock," he
added, looking at his watch.

"We have done without him so far," interrupted Adelaida in her turn.
"Surely we can wait until to-morrow."

"Besides," said Colia, "it is quite unusual, almost improper, for
people in our position to take any interest in literature. Ask Evgenie
Pavlovitch if I am not right. It is much more fashionable to drive a
waggonette with red wheels."

"You got that from some magazine, Colia," remarked Adelaida.

"He gets most of his conversation in that way," laughed Evgenie
Pavlovitch. "He borrows whole phrases from the reviews. I have long
had the pleasure of knowing both Nicholai Ardalionovitch and his
conversational methods, but this time he was not repeating something he
had read; he was alluding, no doubt, to my yellow waggonette, which has,
or had, red wheels. But I have exchanged it, so you are rather behind
the times, Colia."

The prince had been listening attentively to Radomski's words, and
thought his manner very pleasant. When Colia chaffed him about his
waggonette he had replied with perfect equality and in a friendly
fashion. This pleased Muishkin.

At this moment Vera came up to Lizabetha Prokofievna, carrying several
large and beautifully bound books, apparently quite new.

"What is it?" demanded the lady.

"This is Pushkin," replied the girl. "Papa told me to offer it to you."

"What? Impossible!" exclaimed Mrs. Epanchin.

"Not as a present, not as a present! I should not have taken the
liberty," said Lebedeff, appearing suddenly from behind his daughter.
"It is our own Pushkin, our family copy, Annenkoff's edition; it could
not be bought now. I beg to suggest, with great respect, that your
excellency should buy it, and thus quench the noble literary thirst
which is consuming you at this moment," he concluded grandiloquently.

"Oh! if you will sell it, very good--and thank you. You shall not be a
loser! But for goodness' sake, don't twist about like that, sir! I have
heard of you; they tell me you are a very learned person. We must have a
talk one of these days. You will bring me the books yourself?"

"With the greatest respect... and... and veneration," replied Lebedeff,
making extraordinary grimaces.

"Well, bring them, with or without respect, provided always you do not
drop them on the way; but on the condition," went on the lady, looking
full at him, "that you do not cross my threshold. I do not intend to
receive you today. You may send your daughter Vera at once, if you like.
I am much pleased with her."

"Why don't you tell him about them?" said Vera impatiently to her
father. "They will come in, whether you announce them or not, and they
are beginning to make a row. Lef Nicolaievitch,"--she addressed herself
to the prince--"four men are here asking for you. They have waited some
time, and are beginning to make a fuss, and papa will not bring them
in."

"Who are these people?" said the prince.

"They say that they have come on business, and they are the kind of men,
who, if you do not see them here, will follow you about the street.
It would be better to receive them, and then you will get rid of them.
Gavrila Ardalionovitch and Ptitsin are both there, trying to make them
hear reason."

"Pavlicheff's son! It is not worth while!" cried Lebedeff. "There is
no necessity to see them, and it would be most unpleasant for your
excellency. They do not deserve..."

"What? Pavlicheff's son!" cried the prince, much perturbed. "I know...
I know--but I entrusted this matter to Gavrila Ardalionovitch. He told
me..."

At that moment Gania, accompanied by Ptitsin, came out to the terrace.
From an adjoining room came a noise of angry voices, and General
Ivolgin, in loud tones, seemed to be trying to shout them down. Colia
rushed off at once to investigate the cause of the uproar.

"This is most interesting!" observed Evgenie Pavlovitch.

"I expect he knows all about it!" thought the prince.

"What, the son of Pavlicheff? And who may this son of Pavlicheff be?"
asked General Epanchin with surprise; and looking curiously around him,
he discovered that he alone had no clue to the mystery. Expectation and
suspense were on every face, with the exception of that of the prince,
who stood gravely wondering how an affair so entirely personal could
have awakened such lively and widespread interest in so short a time.

Aglaya went up to him with a peculiarly serious look

"It will be well," she said, "if you put an end to this affair yourself
AT ONCE: but you must allow us to be your witnesses. They want to throw
mud at you, prince, and you must be triumphantly vindicated. I give you
joy beforehand!"

"And I also wish for justice to be done, once for all," cried Madame
Epanchin, "about this impudent claim. Deal with them promptly, prince,
and don't spare them! I am sick of hearing about the affair, and many a
quarrel I have had in your cause. But I confess I am anxious to see what
happens, so do make them come out here, and we will remain. You have
heard people talking about it, no doubt?" she added, turning to Prince
S.

"Of course," said he. "I have heard it spoken about at your house, and I
am anxious to see these young men!"

"They are Nihilists, are they not?"

"No, they are not Nihilists," explained Lebedeff, who seemed much
excited. "This is another lot--a special group. According to my nephew
they are more advanced even than the Nihilists. You are quite wrong,
excellency, if you think that your presence will intimidate them;
nothing intimidates them. Educated men, learned men even, are to be
found among Nihilists; these go further, in that they are men of action.
The movement is, properly speaking, a derivative from Nihilism--though
they are only known indirectly, and by hearsay, for they never advertise
their doings in the papers. They go straight to the point. For them, it
is not a question of showing that Pushkin is stupid, or that Russia must
be torn in pieces. No; but if they have a great desire for anything,
they believe they have a right to get it even at the cost of the lives,
say, of eight persons. They are checked by no obstacles. In fact,
prince, I should not advise you..."

But Muishkin had risen, and was on his way to open the door for his
visitors.

"You are slandering them, Lebedeff," said he, smiling.

"You are always thinking about your nephew's conduct. Don't believe
him, Lizabetha Prokofievna. I can assure you Gorsky and Daniloff are
exceptions--and that these are only... mistaken. However, I do not care
about receiving them here, in public. Excuse me, Lizabetha Prokofievna.
They are coming, and you can see them, and then I will take them away.
Please come in, gentlemen!"

Another thought tormented him: He wondered was this an arranged
business--arranged to happen when he had guests in his house, and in
anticipation of his humiliation rather than of his triumph? But he
reproached himself bitterly for such a thought, and felt as if he should
die of shame if it were discovered. When his new visitors appeared, he
was quite ready to believe himself infinitely less to be respected than
any of them.

Four persons entered, led by General Ivolgin, in a state of great
excitement, and talking eloquently.

"He is for me, undoubtedly!" thought the prince, with a smile. Colia
also had joined the party, and was talking with animation to Hippolyte,
who listened with a jeering smile on his lips.

The prince begged the visitors to sit down. They were all so young that
it made the proceedings seem even more extraordinary. Ivan Fedorovitch,
who really understood nothing of what was going on, felt indignant at
the sight of these youths, and would have interfered in some way had it
not been for the extreme interest shown by his wife in the affair.
He therefore remained, partly through curiosity, partly through
good-nature, hoping that his presence might be of some use. But the bow
with which General Ivolgin greeted him irritated him anew; he frowned,
and decided to be absolutely silent.

As to the rest, one was a man of thirty, the retired officer, now a
boxer, who had been with Rogojin, and in his happier days had given
fifteen roubles at a time to beggars. Evidently he had joined the others
as a comrade to give them moral, and if necessary material, support. The
man who had been spoken of as "Pavlicheff's son," although he gave the
name of Antip Burdovsky, was about twenty-two years of age, fair,
thin and rather tall. He was remarkable for the poverty, not to say
uncleanliness, of his personal appearance: the sleeves of his overcoat
were greasy; his dirty waistcoat, buttoned up to his neck, showed not a
trace of linen; a filthy black silk scarf, twisted till it resembled a
cord, was round his neck, and his hands were unwashed. He looked round
with an air of insolent effrontery. His face, covered with pimples,
was neither thoughtful nor even contemptuous; it wore an expression
of complacent satisfaction in demanding his rights and in being an
aggrieved party. His voice trembled, and he spoke so fast, and with such
stammerings, that he might have been taken for a foreigner, though
the purest Russian blood ran in his veins. Lebedeff's nephew, whom
the reader has seen already, accompanied him, and also the youth named
Hippolyte Terentieff. The latter was only seventeen or eighteen. He
had an intelligent face, though it was usually irritated and fretful
in expression. His skeleton-like figure, his ghastly complexion, the
brightness of his eyes, and the red spots of colour on his cheeks,
betrayed the victim of consumption to the most casual glance. He coughed
persistently, and panted for breath; it looked as though he had but
a few weeks more to live. He was nearly dead with fatigue, and fell,
rather than sat, into a chair. The rest bowed as they came in; and being
more or less abashed, put on an air of extreme self-assurance. In short,
their attitude was not that which one would have expected in men who
professed to despise all trivialities, all foolish mundane conventions,
and indeed everything, except their own personal interests.

"Antip Burdovsky," stuttered the son of Pavlicheff.

"Vladimir Doktorenko," said Lebedeff's nephew briskly, and with a
certain pride, as if he boasted of his name.

"Keller," murmured the retired officer.

"Hippolyte Terentieff," cried the last-named, in a shrill voice.

They sat now in a row facing the prince, and frowned, and played with
their caps. All appeared ready to speak, and yet all were silent; the
defiant expression on their faces seemed to say, "No, sir, you don't
take us in!" It could be felt that the first word spoken by anyone
present would bring a torrent of speech from the whole deputation.

VIII.

"I _did_ not expect you, gentlemen," began the prince. "I have been ill
until to-day. A month ago," he continued, addressing himself to Antip
Burdovsky, "I put your business into Gavrila Ardalionovitch Ivolgin's
hands, as I told you then. I do not in the least object to having a
personal interview... but you will agree with me that this is hardly the
time... I propose that we go into another room, if you will not keep me
long... As you see, I have friends here, and believe me..."

"Friends as many as you please, but allow me," interrupted the harsh
voice of Lebedeff's nephew--"allow me to tell you that you might have
treated us rather more politely, and not have kept us waiting at least
two hours...

"No doubt... and I... is that acting like a prince? And you... you may
be a general! But I... I am not your valet! And I... I..." stammered
Antip Burdovsky.

He was extremely excited; his lips trembled, and the resentment of an
embittered soul was in his voice. But he spoke so indistinctly that
hardly a dozen words could be gathered.

"It was a princely action!" sneered Hippolyte.

"If anyone had treated me so," grumbled the boxer.

"I mean to say that if I had been in Burdovsky's place...I..."

"Gentlemen, I did not know you were there; I have only just been
informed, I assure you," repeated Muishkin.

"We are not afraid of your friends, prince," remarked Lebedeff's nephew,
"for we are within our rights."

The shrill tones of Hippolyte interrupted him. "What right have you...
by what right do you demand us to submit this matter, about Burdovsky...
to the judgment of your friends? We know only too well what the judgment
of your friends will be!..."

This beginning gave promise of a stormy discussion. The prince was
much discouraged, but at last he managed to make himself heard amid the
vociferations of his excited visitors.

"If you," he said, addressing Burdovsky--"if you prefer not to speak
here, I offer again to go into another room with you... and as to your
waiting to see me, I repeat that I only this instant heard..."

"Well, you have no right, you have no right, no right at all!... Your
friends indeed!"... gabbled Burdovsky, defiantly examining the faces
round him, and becoming more and more excited. "You have no right!..."
As he ended thus abruptly, he leant forward, staring at the prince with
his short-sighted, bloodshot eyes. The latter was so astonished, that he
did not reply, but looked steadily at him in return.

"Lef Nicolaievitch!" interposed Madame Epanchin, suddenly, "read this at
once, this very moment! It is about this business."

She held out a weekly comic paper, pointing to an article on one of
