
We said at the beginning of our story, that the Epanchins were liked
and esteemed by their neighbours. In spite of his humble origin, Ivan
Fedorovitch himself was received everywhere with respect. He deserved
this, partly on account of his wealth and position, partly because,
though limited, he was really a very good fellow. But a certain
limitation of mind seems to be an indispensable asset, if not to all
public personages, at least to all serious financiers. Added to this,
his manner was modest and unassuming; he knew when to be silent, yet
never allowed himself to be trampled upon. Also--and this was more
important than all--he had the advantage of being under exalted
patronage.

As to Lizabetha Prokofievna, she, as the reader knows, belonged to an
aristocratic family. True, Russians think more of influential friends
than of birth, but she had both. She was esteemed and even loved by
people of consequence in society, whose example in receiving her was
therefore followed by others. It seems hardly necessary to remark that
her family worries and anxieties had little or no foundation, or that
her imagination increased them to an absurd degree; but if you have a
wart on your forehead or nose, you imagine that all the world is looking
at it, and that people would make fun of you because of it, even if you
had discovered America! Doubtless Lizabetha Prokofievna was considered
"eccentric" in society, but she was none the less esteemed: the pity was
that she was ceasing to believe in that esteem. When she thought of
her daughters, she said to herself sorrowfully that she was a hindrance
rather than a help to their future, that her character and temper were
absurd, ridiculous, insupportable. Naturally, she put the blame on her
surroundings, and from morning to night was quarrelling with her husband
and children, whom she really loved to the point of self-sacrifice,
even, one might say, of passion.

She was, above all distressed by the idea that her daughters might grow
up "eccentric," like herself; she believed that no other society girls
were like them. "They are growing into Nihilists!" she repeated over and
over again. For years she had tormented herself with this idea, and with
the question: "Why don't they get married?"

"It is to annoy their mother; that is their one aim in life; it can be
nothing else. The fact is it is all of a piece with these modern ideas,
that wretched woman's question! Six months ago Aglaya took a fancy to
cut off her magnificent hair. Why, even I, when I was young, had nothing
like it! The scissors were in her hand, and I had to go down on my knees
and implore her... She did it, I know, from sheer mischief, to spite
her mother, for she is a naughty, capricious girl, a real spoiled child
spiteful and mischievous to a degree! And then Alexandra wanted to shave
her head, not from caprice or mischief, but, like a little fool, simply
because Aglaya persuaded her she would sleep better without her hair,
and not suffer from headache! And how many suitors have they not had
during the last five years! Excellent offers, too! What more do they
want? Why don't they get married? For no other reason than to vex their
mother--none--none!"

But Lizabetha Prokofievna felt somewhat consoled when she could say that
one of her girls, Adelaida, was settled at last. "It will be one off our
hands!" she declared aloud, though in private she expressed herself with
greater tenderness. The engagement was both happy and suitable, and was
therefore approved in society. Prince S. was a distinguished man, he
had money, and his future wife was devoted to him; what more could
be desired? Lizabetha Prokofievna had felt less anxious about this
daughter, however, although she considered her artistic tastes
suspicious. But to make up for them she was, as her mother expressed it,
"merry," and had plenty of "common-sense." It was Aglaya's future which
disturbed her most. With regard to her eldest daughter, Alexandra, the
mother never quite knew whether there was cause for anxiety or not.
Sometimes she felt as if there was nothing to be expected from her. She
was twenty-five now, and must be fated to be an old maid, and "with such
beauty, too!" The mother spent whole nights in weeping and lamenting,
while all the time the cause of her grief slumbered peacefully. "What is
the matter with her? Is she a Nihilist, or simply a fool?"

But Lizabetha Prokofievna knew perfectly well how unnecessary was the
last question. She set a high value on Alexandra Ivanovna's judgment,
and often consulted her in difficulties; but that she was a 'wet
hen' she never for a moment doubted. "She is so calm; nothing rouses
her--though wet hens are not always calm! Oh! I can't understand
it!" Her eldest daughter inspired Lizabetha with a kind of puzzled
compassion. She did not feel this in Aglaya's case, though the latter
was her idol. It may be said that these outbursts and epithets, such as
"wet hen" (in which the maternal solicitude usually showed itself),
only made Alexandra laugh. Sometimes the most trivial thing annoyed Mrs.
Epanchin, and drove her into a frenzy. For instance, Alexandra Ivanovna
liked to sleep late, and was always dreaming, though her dreams had the
peculiarity of being as innocent and naive as those of a child of seven;
and the very innocence of her dreams annoyed her mother. Once she dreamt
of nine hens, and this was the cause of quite a serious quarrel--no
one knew why. Another time she had--it was most unusual--a dream with
a spark of originality in it. She dreamt of a monk in a dark room, into
which she was too frightened to go. Adelaida and Aglaya rushed off with
shrieks of laughter to relate this to their mother, but she was quite
angry, and said her daughters were all fools.

"H'm! she is as stupid as a fool! A veritable 'wet hen'! Nothing excites
her; and yet she is not happy; some days it makes one miserable only
to look at her! Why is she unhappy, I wonder?" At times Lizabetha
Prokofievna put this question to her husband, and as usual she spoke
in the threatening tone of one who demands an immediate answer. Ivan
Fedorovitch would frown, shrug his shoulders, and at last give his
opinion: "She needs a husband!"

"God forbid that he should share your ideas, Ivan Fedorovitch!" his wife
flashed back. "Or that he should be as gross and churlish as you!"

The general promptly made his escape, and Lizabetha Prokofievna after a
while grew calm again. That evening, of course, she would be unusually
attentive, gentle, and respectful to her "gross and churlish" husband,
her "dear, kind Ivan Fedorovitch," for she had never left off loving
him. She was even still "in love" with him. He knew it well, and for his
part held her in the greatest esteem.

But the mother's great and continual anxiety was Aglaya. "She is exactly
like me--my image in everything," said Mrs. Epanchin to herself. "A
tyrant! A real little demon! A Nihilist! Eccentric, senseless and
mischievous! Good Lord, how unhappy she will be!"

But as we said before, the fact of Adelaida's approaching marriage was
balm to the mother. For a whole month she forgot her fears and worries.

Adelaida's fate was settled; and with her name that of Aglaya's was
linked, in society gossip. People whispered that Aglaya, too, was "as
good as engaged;" and Aglaya always looked so sweet and behaved so
well (during this period), that the mother's heart was full of joy. Of
course, Evgenie Pavlovitch must be thoroughly studied first, before
the final step should be taken; but, really, how lovely dear Aglaya had
become--she actually grew more beautiful every day! And then--Yes, and
then--this abominable prince showed his face again, and everything went
topsy-turvy at once, and everyone seemed as mad as March hares.

What had really happened?

If it had been any other family than the Epanchins', nothing particular
would have happened. But, thanks to Mrs. Epanchin's invariable fussiness
and anxiety, there could not be the slightest hitch in the simplest
matters of everyday life, but she immediately foresaw the most dreadful
and alarming consequences, and suffered accordingly.

What then must have been her condition, when, among all the imaginary
anxieties and calamities which so constantly beset her, she now saw
looming ahead a serious cause for annoyance--something really likely to
arouse doubts and suspicions!

"How dared they, how DARED they write that hateful anonymous letter
informing me that Aglaya is in communication with Nastasia Philipovna?"
she thought, as she dragged the prince along towards her own house,
and again when she sat him down at the round table where the family was
already assembled. "How dared they so much as THINK of such a thing? I
should DIE with shame if I thought there was a particle of truth in it,
or if I were to show the letter to Aglaya herself! Who dares play these
jokes upon US, the Epanchins? WHY didn't we go to the Yelagin instead
of coming down here? I TOLD you we had better go to the Yelagin this
summer, Ivan Fedorovitch. It's all your fault. I dare say it was that
Varia who sent the letter. It's all Ivan Fedorovitch. THAT woman is
doing it all for him, I know she is, to show she can make a fool of him
now just as she did when he used to give her pearls.

"But after all is said, we are mixed up in it. Your daughters are mixed
up in it, Ivan Fedorovitch; young ladies in society, young ladies at an
age to be married; they were present, they heard everything there was to
hear. They were mixed up with that other scene, too, with those dreadful
youths. You must be pleased to remember they heard it all. I cannot
forgive that wretched prince. I never shall forgive him! And why, if you
please, has Aglaya had an attack of nerves for these last three
days? Why has she all but quarrelled with her sisters, even with
Alexandra--whom she respects so much that she always kisses her hands as
though she were her mother? What are all these riddles of hers that we
have to guess? What has Gavrila Ardalionovitch to do with it? Why did
she take upon herself to champion him this morning, and burst into tears
over it? Why is there an allusion to that cursed 'poor knight' in the
anonymous letter? And why did I rush off to him just now like a lunatic,
and drag him back here? I do believe I've gone mad at last. What on
earth have I done now? To talk to a young man about my daughter's
secrets--and secrets having to do with himself, too! Thank goodness,
he's an idiot, and a friend of the house! Surely Aglaya hasn't fallen in
love with such a gaby! What an idea! Pfu! we ought all to be put under
glass cases--myself first of all--and be shown off as curiosities, at
ten copecks a peep!"

"I shall never forgive you for all this, Ivan Fedorovitch--never! Look
at her now. Why doesn't she make fun of him? She said she would, and she
doesn't. Look there! She stares at him with all her eyes, and doesn't
move; and yet she told him not to come. He looks pale enough; and that
abominable chatterbox, Evgenie Pavlovitch, monopolizes the whole of the
conversation. Nobody else can get a word in. I could soon find out all
about everything if I could only change the subject."

The prince certainly was very pale. He sat at the table and seemed to be
feeling, by turns, sensations of alarm and rapture.

Oh, how frightened he was of looking to one side--one particular
corner--whence he knew very well that a pair of dark eyes were watching
him intently, and how happy he was to think that he was once more among
them, and occasionally hearing that well-known voice, although she had
written and forbidden him to come again!

"What on earth will she say to me, I wonder?" he thought to himself.

He had not said a word yet; he sat silent and listened to Evgenie
Pavlovitch's eloquence. The latter had never appeared so happy and
excited as on this evening. The prince listened to him, but for a long
time did not take in a word he said.

Excepting Ivan Fedorovitch, who had not as yet returned from town, the
whole family was present. Prince S. was there; and they all intended to
go out to hear the band very soon.

Colia arrived presently and joined the circle. "So he is received as
usual, after all," thought the prince.

The Epanchins' country-house was a charming building, built after the
model of a Swiss chalet, and covered with creepers. It was surrounded on
all sides by a flower garden, and the family sat, as a rule, on the open
verandah as at the prince's house.

The subject under discussion did not appear to be very popular with the
assembly, and some would have been delighted to change it; but Evgenie
would not stop holding forth, and the prince's arrival seemed to spur
him on to still further oratorical efforts.

Lizabetha Prokofievna frowned, but had not as yet grasped the subject,
which seemed to have arisen out of a heated argument. Aglaya sat apart,
almost in the corner, listening in stubborn silence.

"Excuse me," continued Evgenie Pavlovitch hotly, "I don't say a word
against liberalism. Liberalism is not a sin, it is a necessary part of
a great whole, which whole would collapse and fall to pieces without
it. Liberalism has just as much right to exist as has the most moral
conservatism; but I am attacking RUSSIAN liberalism; and I attack it for
the simple reason that a Russian liberal is not a Russian liberal, he is
a non-Russian liberal. Show me a real Russian liberal, and I'll kiss him
before you all, with pleasure."

"If he cared to kiss you, that is," said Alexandra, whose cheeks were
red with irritation and excitement.

"Look at that, now," thought the mother to herself, "she does nothing
but sleep and eat for a year at a time, and then suddenly flies out in
the most incomprehensible way!"

The prince observed that Alexandra appeared to be angry with Evgenie,
because he spoke on a serious subject in a frivolous manner, pretending
to be in earnest, but with an under-current of irony.

"I was saying just now, before you came in, prince, that there has
been nothing national up to now, about our liberalism, and nothing the
liberals do, or have done, is in the least degree national. They are
drawn from two classes only, the old landowning class, and clerical
families--"

"How, nothing that they have done is Russian?" asked Prince S.

"It may be Russian, but it is not national. Our liberals are not
Russian, nor are our conservatives, and you may be sure that the nation
does not recognize anything that has been done by the landed gentry, or
by the seminarists, or what is to be done either."

"Come, that's good! How can you maintain such a paradox? If you are
serious, that is. I cannot allow such a statement about the landed
proprietors to pass unchallenged. Why, you are a landed proprietor
yourself!" cried Prince S. hotly.

"I suppose you'll say there is nothing national about our literature
either?" said Alexandra.

"Well, I am not a great authority on literary questions, but I
certainly do hold that Russian literature is not Russian, except perhaps
Lomonosoff, Pouschkin and Gogol."

"In the first place, that is a considerable admission, and in the second
place, one of the above was a peasant, and the other two were both
landed proprietors!"

"Quite so, but don't be in such a hurry! For since it has been the part
of these three men, and only these three, to say something absolutely
their own, not borrowed, so by this very fact these three men become
really national. If any Russian shall have done or said anything really
and absolutely original, he is to be called national from that moment,
though he may not be able to talk the Russian language; still he is a
national Russian. I consider that an axiom. But we were not speaking
of literature; we began by discussing the socialists. Very well then,
I insist that there does not exist one single Russian socialist. There
does not, and there has never existed such a one, because all socialists
are derived from the two classes--the landed proprietors, and the
seminarists. All our eminent socialists are merely old liberals of
the class of landed proprietors, men who were liberals in the days of
serfdom. Why do you laugh? Give me their books, give me their studies,
their memoirs, and though I am not a literary critic, yet I will prove
as clear as day that every chapter and every word of their writings has
been the work of a former landed proprietor of the old school. You'll
find that all their raptures, all their generous transports are
proprietary, all their woes and their tears, proprietary; all
proprietary or seminarist! You are laughing again, and you, prince, are
smiling too. Don't you agree with me?"

It was true enough that everybody was laughing, the prince among them.

"I cannot tell you on the instant whether I agree with you or not,"
said the latter, suddenly stopping his laughter, and starting like a
schoolboy caught at mischief. "But, I assure you, I am listening to you
with extreme gratification."

So saying, he almost panted with agitation, and a cold sweat stood upon
his forehead. These were his first words since he had entered the house;
he tried to lift his eyes, and look around, but dared not; Evgenie
Pavlovitch noticed his confusion, and smiled.

"I'll just tell you one fact, ladies and gentlemen," continued the
latter, with apparent seriousness and even exaltation of manner, but
with a suggestion of "chaff" behind every word, as though he were
laughing in his sleeve at his own nonsense--"a fact, the discovery
of which, I believe, I may claim to have made by myself alone. At all
events, no other has ever said or written a word about it; and in this
fact is expressed the whole essence of Russian liberalism of the sort
which I am now considering.

"In the first place, what is liberalism, speaking generally, but an
attack (whether mistaken or reasonable, is quite another question) upon
the existing order of things? Is this so? Yes. Very well. Then my 'fact'
consists in this, that RUSSIAN liberalism is not an attack upon the
existing order of things, but an attack upon the very essence of things
themselves--indeed, on the things themselves; not an attack on the
Russian order of things, but on Russia itself. My Russian liberal
goes so far as to reject Russia; that is, he hates and strikes his own
mother. Every misfortune and mishap of the mother-country fills him with
mirth, and even with ecstasy. He hates the national customs, Russian
history, and everything. If he has a justification, it is that he does
not know what he is doing, and believes that his hatred of Russia is the
grandest and most profitable kind of liberalism. (You will often find
a liberal who is applauded and esteemed by his fellows, but who is in
reality the dreariest, blindest, dullest of conservatives, and is not
aware of the fact.) This hatred for Russia has been mistaken by some of
our 'Russian liberals' for sincere love of their country, and they
boast that they see better than their neighbours what real love of one's
country should consist in. But of late they have grown, more candid and
are ashamed of the expression 'love of country,' and have annihilated
the very spirit of the words as something injurious and petty and
undignified. This is the truth, and I hold by it; but at the same time
it is a phenomenon which has not been repeated at any other time or
place; and therefore, though I hold to it as a fact, yet I recognize
that it is an accidental phenomenon, and may likely enough pass away.
There can be no such thing anywhere else as a liberal who really hates
his country; and how is this fact to be explained among US? By
my original statement that a Russian liberal is NOT a RUSSIAN
liberal--that's the only explanation that I can see."

"I take all that you have said as a joke," said Prince S. seriously.

"I have not seen all kinds of liberals, and cannot, therefore, set
myself up as a judge," said Alexandra, "but I have heard all you have
said with indignation. You have taken some accidental case and twisted
it into a universal law, which is unjust."

"Accidental case!" said Evgenie Pavlovitch. "Do you consider it an
accidental case, prince?"

"I must also admit," said the prince, "that I have not seen much, or
been very far into the question; but I cannot help thinking that you are
more or less right, and that Russian liberalism--that phase of it which
you are considering, at least--really is sometimes inclined to hate
Russia itself, and not only its existing order of things in general. Of
course this is only PARTIALLY the truth; you cannot lay down the law for
all..."

The prince blushed and broke off, without finishing what he meant to
say.

In spite of his shyness and agitation, he could not help being greatly
interested in the conversation. A special characteristic of his was
the naive candour with which he always listened to arguments which
interested him, and with which he answered any questions put to him on
the subject at issue. In the very expression of his face this naivete
was unmistakably evident, this disbelief in the insincerity of others,
and unsuspecting disregard of irony or humour in their words.

But though Evgenie Pavlovitch had put his questions to the prince with
no other purpose but to enjoy the joke of his simple-minded seriousness,
yet now, at his answer, he was surprised into some seriousness himself,
and looked gravely at Muishkin as though he had not expected that sort
of answer at all.

"Why, how strange!" he ejaculated. "You didn't answer me seriously,
surely, did you?"

"Did not you ask me the question seriously" inquired the prince, in
amazement.

Everybody laughed.

"Oh, trust HIM for that!" said Adelaida. "Evgenie Pavlovitch turns
everything and everybody he can lay hold of to ridicule. You should hear
the things he says sometimes, apparently in perfect seriousness."

"In my opinion the conversation has been a painful one throughout, and
we ought never to have begun it," said Alexandra. "We were all going for
a walk--"

"Come along then," said Evgenie; "it's a glorious evening. But, to prove
that this time I was speaking absolutely seriously, and especially
to prove this to the prince (for you, prince, have interested me
exceedingly, and I swear to you that I am not quite such an ass as
I like to appear sometimes, although I am rather an ass, I admit),
and--well, ladies and gentlemen, will you allow me to put just one more
question to the prince, out of pure curiosity? It shall be the last.
This question came into my mind a couple of hours since (you see,
prince, I do think seriously at times), and I made my own decision upon
it; now I wish to hear what the prince will say to it."

"We have just used the expression 'accidental case.' This is a
significant phrase; we often hear it. Well, not long since everyone was
talking and reading about that terrible murder of six people on the part
of a--young fellow, and of the extraordinary speech of the counsel for
the defence, who observed that in the poverty-stricken condition of the
criminal it must have come NATURALLY into his head to kill these six
people. I do not quote his words, but that is the sense of them, or
something very like it. Now, in my opinion, the barrister who put
forward this extraordinary plea was probably absolutely convinced that
he was stating the most liberal, the most humane, the most enlightened
view of the case that could possibly be brought forward in these days.
Now, was this distortion, this capacity for a perverted way of viewing
things, a special or accidental case, or is such a general rule?"

Everyone laughed at this.

"A special case--accidental, of course!" cried Alexandra and Adelaida.

"Let me remind you once more, Evgenie," said Prince S., "that your joke
is getting a little threadbare."

"What do you think about it, prince?" asked Evgenie, taking no notice
of the last remark, and observing Muishkin's serious eyes fixed upon his
face. "What do you think--was it a special or a usual case--the rule, or
an exception? I confess I put the question especially for you."

"No, I don't think it was a special case," said the prince, quietly, but
firmly.

"My dear fellow!" cried Prince S., with some annoyance, "don't you see
that he is chaffing you? He is simply laughing at you, and wants to make
game of you."

"I thought Evgenie Pavlovitch was talking seriously," said the prince,
blushing and dropping his eyes.

"My dear prince," continued Prince S. "remember what you and I were
saying two or three months ago. We spoke of the fact that in our newly
opened Law Courts one could already lay one's finger upon so many
talented and remarkable young barristers. How pleased you were with
the state of things as we found it, and how glad I was to observe your
delight! We both said it was a matter to be proud of; but this clumsy
defence that Evgenie mentions, this strange argument CAN, of course,
only be an accidental case--one in a thousand!"

The prince reflected a little, but very soon he replied, with absolute
conviction in his tone, though he still spoke somewhat shyly and
timidly:

"I only wished to say that this 'distortion,' as Evgenie Pavlovitch
expressed it, is met with very often, and is far more the general rule
than the exception, unfortunately for Russia. So much so, that if this
distortion were not the general rule, perhaps these dreadful crimes
would be less frequent."

"Dreadful crimes? But I can assure you that crimes just as dreadful,
and probably more horrible, have occurred before our times, and at all
times, and not only here in Russia, but everywhere else as well. And in
my opinion it is not at all likely that such murders will cease to occur
for a very long time to come. The only difference is that in former
times there was less publicity, while now everyone talks and writes
freely about such things--which fact gives the impression that such
crimes have only now sprung into existence. That is where your mistake
lies--an extremely natural mistake, I assure you, my dear fellow!" said
Prince S.

"I know that there were just as many, and just as terrible, crimes
before our times. Not long since I visited a convict prison and made
acquaintance with some of the criminals. There were some even more
dreadful criminals than this one we have been speaking of--men who
have murdered a dozen of their fellow-creatures, and feel no remorse
whatever. But what I especially noticed was this, that the very most
hopeless and remorseless murderer--however hardened a criminal he may
be--still KNOWS THAT HE IS A CRIMINAL; that is, he is conscious that
he has acted wickedly, though he may feel no remorse whatever. And they
were all like this. Those of whom Evgenie Pavlovitch has spoken, do not
admit that they are criminals at all; they think they had a right to
do what they did, and that they were even doing a good deed, perhaps.
I consider there is the greatest difference between the two cases.
And recollect--it was a YOUTH, at the particular age which is most
helplessly susceptible to the distortion of ideas!"

Prince S. was now no longer smiling; he gazed at the prince in
bewilderment.

Alexandra, who had seemed to wish to put in her word when the prince
began, now sat silent, as though some sudden thought had caused her to
change her mind about speaking.

Evgenie Pavlovitch gazed at him in real surprise, and this time his
expression of face had no mockery in it whatever.

"What are you looking so surprised about, my friend?" asked Mrs.
Epanchin, suddenly. "Did you suppose he was stupider than yourself, and
was incapable of forming his own opinions, or what?"

"No! Oh no! Not at all!" said Evgenie. "But--how is it, prince, that
you--(excuse the question, will you?)--if you are capable of observing
and seeing things as you evidently do, how is it that you saw nothing
distorted or perverted in that claim upon your property, which you
acknowledged a day or two since; and which was full of arguments founded
upon the most distorted views of right and wrong?"

"I'll tell you what, my friend," cried Mrs. Epanchin, of a sudden, "here
are we all sitting here and imagining we are very clever, and perhaps
laughing at the prince, some of us, and meanwhile he has received a
letter this very day in which that same claimant renounces his claim,
and begs the prince's pardon. There I we don't often get that sort of
letter; and yet we are not ashamed to walk with our noses in the air
before him."

"And Hippolyte has come down here to stay," said Colia, suddenly.

"What! has he arrived?" said the prince, starting up.

"Yes, I brought him down from town just after you had left the house."

"There now! It's just like him," cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, boiling
over once more, and entirely oblivious of the fact that she had
just taken the prince's part. "I dare swear that you went up to town
yesterday on purpose to get the little wretch to do you the great honour
of coming to stay at your house. You did go up to town, you know you
did--you said so yourself! Now then, did you, or did you not, go down on
your knees and beg him to come, confess!"

"No, he didn't, for I saw it all myself," said Colia. "On the contrary,
Hippolyte kissed his hand twice and thanked him; and all the prince said
was that he thought Hippolyte might feel better here in the country!"

"Don't, Colia,--what is the use of saying all that?" cried the prince,
rising and taking his hat.

"Where are you going to now?" cried Mrs. Epanchin.

"Never mind about him now, prince," said Colia. "He is all right and
taking a nap after the journey. He is very happy to be here; but I think
perhaps it would be better if you let him alone for today,--he is very
sensitive now that he is so ill--and he might be embarrassed if you show
him too much attention at first. He is decidedly better today, and says
he has not felt so well for the last six months, and has coughed much
less, too."

The prince observed that Aglaya came out of her corner and approached
the table at this point.

He did not dare look at her, but he was conscious, to the very tips of
his fingers, that she was gazing at him, perhaps angrily; and that she
had probably flushed up with a look of fiery indignation in her black
eyes.

"It seems to me, Mr. Colia, that you were very foolish to bring your
young friend down--if he is the same consumptive boy who wept so
profusely, and invited us all to his own funeral," remarked Evgenie
Pavlovitch. "He talked so eloquently about the blank wall outside his
bedroom window, that I'm sure he will never support life here without
it."

"I think so too," said Mrs. Epanchin; "he will quarrel with you, and be
off," and she drew her workbox towards her with an air of dignity, quite
oblivious of the fact that the family was about to start for a walk in
the park.

"Yes, I remember he boasted about the blank wall in an extraordinary
way," continued Evgenie, "and I feel that without that blank wall
he will never be able to die eloquently; and he does so long to die
eloquently!"

"Oh, you must forgive him the blank wall," said the prince, quietly. "He
has come down to see a few trees now, poor fellow."

"Oh, I forgive him with all my heart; you may tell him so if you like,"
laughed Evgenie.

"I don't think you should take it quite like that," said the prince,
quietly, and without removing his eyes from the carpet. "I think it is
more a case of his forgiving you."

"Forgiving me! why so? What have I done to need his forgiveness?"

"If you don't understand, then--but of course, you do understand.
He wished--he wished to bless you all round and to have your
blessing--before he died--that's all."

"My dear prince," began Prince S., hurriedly, exchanging glances with
some of those present, "you will not easily find heaven on earth, and
yet you seem to expect to. Heaven is a difficult thing to find anywhere,
prince; far more difficult than appears to that good heart of yours.
Better stop this conversation, or we shall all be growing quite
disturbed in our minds, and--"

"Let's go and hear the band, then," said Lizabetha Prokofievna, angrily
rising from her place.

The rest of the company followed her example.

II.

THE prince suddenly approached Evgenie Pavlovitch.

"Evgenie Pavlovitch," he said, with strange excitement and seizing the
latter's hand in his own, "be assured that I esteem you as a generous
and honourable man, in spite of everything. Be assured of that."

Evgenie Pavlovitch fell back a step in astonishment. For one moment it
was all he could do to restrain himself from bursting out laughing; but,
looking closer, he observed that the prince did not seem to be quite
himself; at all events, he was in a very curious state.

"I wouldn't mind betting, prince," he cried, "that you did not in the
least mean to say that, and very likely you meant to address someone
else altogether. What is it? Are you feeling unwell or anything?"

"Very likely, extremely likely, and you must be a very close observer to
detect the fact that perhaps I did not intend to come up to YOU at all."

So saying he smiled strangely; but suddenly and excitedly he began
again:

"Don't remind me of what I have done or said. Don't! I am very much
ashamed of myself, I--"

"Why, what have you done? I don't understand you."

"I see you are ashamed of me, Evgenie Pavlovitch; you are blushing for
me; that's a sign of a good heart. Don't be afraid; I shall go away
directly."

"What's the matter with him? Do his fits begin like that?" said
Lizabetha Prokofievna, in a high state of alarm, addressing Colia.

"No, no, Lizabetha Prokofievna, take no notice of me. I am not going to
have a fit. I will go away directly; but I know I am afflicted. I was
twenty-four years an invalid, you see--the first twenty-four years of my
life--so take all I do and say as the sayings and actions of an
invalid. I'm going away directly, I really am--don't be afraid. I am
not blushing, for I don't think I need blush about it, need I? But I see
that I am out of place in society--society is better without me. It's
not vanity, I assure you. I have thought over it all these last three
days, and I have made up my mind that I ought to unbosom myself candidly
before you at the first opportunity. There are certain things, certain
great ideas, which I must not so much as approach, as Prince S. has
just reminded me, or I shall make you all laugh. I have no sense of
proportion, I know; my words and gestures do not express my ideas--they
are a humiliation and abasement of the ideas, and therefore, I have no
right--and I am too sensitive. Still, I believe I am beloved in this
household, and esteemed far more than I deserve. But I can't help
knowing that after twenty-four years of illness there must be some trace
left, so that it is impossible for people to refrain from laughing at me
sometimes; don't you think so?"

He seemed to pause for a reply, for some verdict, as it were, and looked
humbly around him.

All present stood rooted to the earth with amazement at this unexpected
and apparently uncalled-for outbreak; but the poor prince's painful and
rambling speech gave rise to a strange episode.

"Why do you say all this here?" cried Aglaya, suddenly. "Why do you talk
like this to THEM?"

She appeared to be in the last stages of wrath and irritation; her eyes
flashed. The prince stood dumbly and blindly before her, and suddenly
grew pale.

"There is not one of them all who is worthy of these words of yours,"
continued Aglaya. "Not one of them is worth your little finger, not one
of them has heart or head to compare with yours! You are more honest
than all, and better, nobler, kinder, wiser than all. There are some
here who are unworthy to bend and pick up the handkerchief you have just
dropped. Why do you humiliate yourself like this, and place yourself
lower than these people? Why do you debase yourself before them? Why
have you no pride?"

"My God! Who would ever have believed this?" cried Mrs. Epanchin,
wringing her hands.

"Hurrah for the 'poor knight'!" cried Colia.

"Be quiet! How dare they laugh at me in your house?" said Aglaya,
turning sharply on her mother in that hysterical frame of mind that
rides recklessly over every obstacle and plunges blindly through
proprieties. "Why does everyone, everyone worry and torment me? Why have
they all been bullying me these three days about you, prince? I will
not marry you--never, and under no circumstances! Know that once and for
all; as if anyone could marry an absurd creature like you! Just look in
the glass and see what you look like, this very moment! Why, WHY do they
torment me and say I am going to marry you? You must know it; you are in
the plot with them!"

"No one ever tormented you on the subject," murmured Adelaida, aghast.

"No one ever thought of such a thing! There has never been a word said
about it!" cried Alexandra.

"Who has been annoying her? Who has been tormenting the child? Who
could have said such a thing to her? Is she raving?" cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna, trembling with rage, to the company in general.

"Every one of them has been saying it--every one of them--all these
three days! And I will never, never marry him!"

So saying, Aglaya burst into bitter tears, and, hiding her face in her
handkerchief, sank back into a chair.

"But he has never even--"

"I have never asked you to marry me, Aglaya Ivanovna!" said the prince,
of a sudden.

"WHAT?" cried Mrs. Epanchin, raising her hands in horror. "WHAT'S that?"

She could not believe her ears.

"I meant to say--I only meant to say," said the prince, faltering,
"I merely meant to explain to Aglaya Ivanovna--to have the honour to
explain, as it were--that I had no intention--never had--to ask the
honour of her hand. I assure you I am not guilty, Aglaya Ivanovna, I
am not, indeed. I never did wish to--I never thought of it at all--and
never shall--you'll see it yourself--you may be quite assured of it.
Some wicked person has been maligning me to you; but it's all right.
Don't worry about it."

So saying, the prince approached Aglaya.

She took the handkerchief from her face, glanced keenly at him, took
in what he had said, and burst out laughing--such a merry, unrestrained
laugh, so hearty and gay, that. Adelaida could not contain herself. She,
too, glanced at the prince's panic-stricken countenance, then rushed at
her sister, threw her arms round her neck, and burst into as merry a
fit of laughter as Aglaya's own. They laughed together like a couple of
school-girls. Hearing and seeing this, the prince smiled happily, and in
accents of relief and joy, he exclaimed "Well, thank God--thank God!"

Alexandra now joined in, and it looked as though the three sisters were
going to laugh on for ever.

"They are insane," muttered Lizabetha Prokofievna. "Either they frighten
one out of one's wits, or else--"

But Prince S. was laughing now, too, so was Evgenie Pavlovitch, so was
Colia, and so was the prince himself, who caught the infection as he
looked round radiantly upon the others.

"Come along, let's go out for a walk!" cried Adelaida. "We'll all go
together, and the prince must absolutely go with us. You needn't go
away, you dear good fellow! ISN'T he a dear, Aglaya? Isn't he, mother? I
must really give him a kiss for--for his explanation to Aglaya just now.
Mother, dear, I may kiss him, mayn't I? Aglaya, may I kiss YOUR prince?"
cried the young rogue, and sure enough she skipped up to the prince and
kissed his forehead.

He seized her hands, and pressed them so hard that Adelaida nearly cried
out; he then gazed with delight into her eyes, and raising her right
hand to his lips with enthusiasm, kissed it three times.

"Come along," said Aglaya. "Prince, you must walk with me. May he,
mother? This young cavalier, who won't have me? You said you would NEVER
have me, didn't you, prince? No-no, not like that; THAT'S not the way
to give your arm. Don't you know how to give your arm to a lady yet?
There--so. Now, come along, you and I will lead the way. Would you like
to lead the way with me alone, tete-a-tete?"

She went on talking and chatting without a pause, with occasional little
bursts of laughter between.

"Thank God--thank God!" said Lizabetha Prokofievna to herself, without
quite knowing why she felt so relieved.

"What extraordinary people they are!" thought Prince S., for perhaps
the hundredth time since he had entered into intimate relations with the
family; but--he liked these "extraordinary people," all the same. As for
Prince Lef Nicolaievitch himself, Prince S. did not seem quite to like
him, somehow. He was decidedly preoccupied and a little disturbed as
they all started off.

Evgenie Pavlovitch seemed to be in a lively humour. He made Adelaida and
Alexandra laugh all the way to the Vauxhall; but they both laughed
so very really and promptly that the worthy Evgenie began at last to
suspect that they were not listening to him at all.

At this idea, he burst out laughing all at once, in quite unaffected
mirth, and without giving any explanation.

The sisters, who also appeared to be in high spirits, never tired of
glancing at Aglaya and the prince, who were walking in front. It was
evident that their younger sister was a thorough puzzle to them both.

Prince S. tried hard to get up a conversation with Mrs. Epanchin upon
outside subjects, probably with the good intention of distracting and
amusing her; but he bored her dreadfully. She was absent-minded to a
degree, and answered at cross purposes, and sometimes not at all.

But the puzzle and mystery of Aglaya was not yet over for the evening.
The last exhibition fell to the lot of the prince alone. When they had
proceeded some hundred paces or so from the house, Aglaya said to her
obstinately silent cavalier in a quick half-whisper:

"Look to the right!"

The prince glanced in the direction indicated.

"Look closer. Do you see that bench, in the park there, just by those
three big trees--that green bench?"

The prince replied that he saw it.

"Do you like the position of it? Sometimes of a morning early, at seven
o'clock, when all the rest are still asleep, I come out and sit there
alone."

The prince muttered that the spot was a lovely one.

"Now, go away, I don't wish to have your arm any longer; or perhaps,
better, continue to give me your arm, and walk along beside me, but
don't speak a word to me. I wish to think by myself."

The warning was certainly unnecessary; for the prince would not have
said a word all the rest of the time whether forbidden to speak or not.
His heart beat loud and painfully when Aglaya spoke of the bench; could
she--but no! he banished the thought, after an instant's deliberation.

At Pavlofsk, on weekdays, the public is more select than it is on
Sundays and Saturdays, when the townsfolk come down to walk about and
enjoy the park.

The ladies dress elegantly, on these days, and it is the fashion to
gather round the band, which is probably the best of our pleasure-garden
bands, and plays the newest pieces. The behaviour of the public is most
correct and proper, and there is an appearance of friendly intimacy
among the usual frequenters. Many come for nothing but to look at their
acquaintances, but there are others who come for the sake of the music.
It is very seldom that anything happens to break the harmony of the
proceedings, though, of course, accidents will happen everywhere.

On this particular evening the weather was lovely, and there were
a large number of people present. All the places anywhere near the
orchestra were occupied.

Our friends took chairs near the side exit. The crowd and the music
cheered Mrs. Epanchin a little, and amused the girls; they bowed and
shook hands with some of their friends and nodded at a distance to
others; they examined the ladies' dresses, noticed comicalities
and eccentricities among the people, and laughed and talked among
themselves. Evgenie Pavlovitch, too, found plenty of friends to bow to.
Several people noticed Aglaya and the prince, who were still together.

Before very long two or three young men had come up, and one or two
remained to talk; all of these young men appeared to be on intimate
terms with Evgenie Pavlovitch. Among them was a young officer, a
remarkably handsome fellow--very good-natured and a great chatterbox. He
tried to get up a conversation with Aglaya, and did his best to secure
her attention. Aglaya behaved very graciously to him, and chatted
and laughed merrily. Evgenie Pavlovitch begged the prince's leave to
introduce their friend to him. The prince hardly realized what was
wanted of him, but the introduction came off; the two men bowed and
shook hands.

Evgenie Pavlovitch's friend asked the prince some question, but the
latter did not reply, or if he did, he muttered something so strangely
indistinct that there was nothing to be made of it. The officer stared
intently at him, then glanced at Evgenie, divined why the latter had
introduced him, and gave his undivided attention to Aglaya again. Only
Evgenie Pavlovitch observed that Aglaya flushed up for a moment at this.

The prince did not notice that others were talking and making themselves
agreeable to Aglaya; in fact, at moments, he almost forgot that he was
sitting by her himself. At other moments he felt a longing to go away
somewhere and be alone with his thoughts, and to feel that no one knew
where he was.

Or if that were impossible he would like to be alone at home, on the
terrace-without either Lebedeff or his children, or anyone else about
him, and to lie there and think--a day and night and another day again!
He thought of the mountains-and especially of a certain spot which he
used to frequent, whence he would look down upon the distant valleys and
fields, and see the waterfall, far off, like a little silver thread,
and the old ruined castle in the distance. Oh! how he longed to be there
now--alone with his thoughts--to think of one thing all his life--one
thing! A thousand years would not be too much time! And let everyone
here forget him--forget him utterly! How much better it would have been
if they had never known him--if all this could but prove to be a dream.
Perhaps it was a dream!

Now and then he looked at Aglaya for five minutes at a time, without
taking his eyes off her face; but his expression was very strange;
he would gaze at her as though she were an object a couple of miles
distant, or as though he were looking at her portrait and not at herself
at all.

"Why do you look at me like that, prince?" she asked suddenly, breaking
off her merry conversation and laughter with those about her. "I'm
afraid of you! You look as though you were just going to put out
your hand and touch my face to see if it's real! Doesn't he, Evgenie
Pavlovitch--doesn't he look like that?"

The prince seemed surprised that he should have been addressed at all;
he reflected a moment, but did not seem to take in what had been said
to him; at all events, he did not answer. But observing that she and
the others had begun to laugh, he too opened his mouth and laughed with
them.

The laughter became general, and the young officer, who seemed a
particularly lively sort of person, simply shook with mirth.

Aglaya suddenly whispered angrily to herself the word--

"Idiot!"

"My goodness--surely she is not in love with such a--surely she isn't
mad!" groaned Mrs. Epanchin, under her breath.

"It's all a joke, mamma; it's just a joke like the 'poor
knight'--nothing more whatever, I assure you!" Alexandra whispered
in her ear. "She is chaffing him--making a fool of him, after her
own private fashion, that's all! But she carries it just a little
too far--she is a regular little actress. How she frightened us just
now--didn't she?--and all for a lark!"

"Well, it's lucky she has happened upon an idiot, then, that's all I
can say!" whispered Lizabetha Prokofievna, who was somewhat comforted,
however, by her daughter's remark.

The prince had heard himself referred to as "idiot," and had shuddered
at the moment; but his shudder, it so happened, was not caused by the
word applied to him. The fact was that in the crowd, not far from where
lie was sitting, a pale familiar face, with curly black hair, and a
well-known smile and expression, had flashed across his vision for a
moment, and disappeared again. Very likely he had imagined it! There
only remained to him the impression of a strange smile, two eyes, and
a bright green tie. Whether the man had disappeared among the crowd, or
whether he had turned towards the Vauxhall, the prince could not say.

But a moment or two afterwards he began to glance keenly about him. That
first vision might only too likely be the forerunner of a second; it was
almost certain to be so. Surely he had not forgotten the possibility
of such a meeting when he came to the Vauxhall? True enough, he had not
remarked where he was coming to when he set out with Aglaya; he had not
been in a condition to remark anything at all.

Had he been more careful to observe his companion, he would have seen
that for the last quarter of an hour Aglaya had also been glancing
around in apparent anxiety, as though she expected to see someone, or
something particular, among the crowd of people. Now, at the moment when
his own anxiety became so marked, her excitement also increased visibly,
and when he looked about him, she did the same.

The reason for their anxiety soon became apparent. From that very side
entrance to the Vauxhall, near which the prince and all the Epanchin
party were seated, there suddenly appeared quite a large knot of
persons, at least a dozen.

Heading this little band walked three ladies, two of whom were
remarkably lovely; and there was nothing surprising in the fact that
they should have had a large troop of admirers following in their wake.

But there was something in the appearance of both the ladies and their
admirers which was peculiar, quite different for that of the rest of the
public assembled around the orchestra.

Nearly everyone observed the little band advancing, and all pretended
not to see or notice them, except a few young fellows who exchanged
glances and smiled, saying something to one another in whispers.

It was impossible to avoid noticing them, however, in reality, for they
made their presence only too conspicuous by laughing and talking loudly.
It was to be supposed that some of them were more than half drunk,
although they were well enough dressed, some even particularly well.
There were one or two, however, who were very strange-looking creatures,
with flushed faces and extraordinary clothes; some were military men;
not all were quite young; one or two were middle-aged gentlemen of
decidedly disagreeable appearance, men who are avoided in society like
the plague, decked out in large gold studs and rings, and magnificently
"got up," generally.

Among our suburban resorts there are some which enjoy a specially
high reputation for respectability and fashion; but the most careful
individual is not absolutely exempt from the danger of a tile falling
suddenly upon his head from his neighbour's roof.

Such a tile was about to descend upon the elegant and decorous public
now assembled to hear the music.

In order to pass from the Vauxhall to the band-stand, the visitor has
to descend two or three steps. Just at these steps the group paused, as
though it feared to proceed further; but very quickly one of the three
ladies, who formed its apex, stepped forward into the charmed circle,
followed by two members of her suite.

One of these was a middle-aged man of very respectable appearance, but
with the stamp of parvenu upon him, a man whom nobody knew, and who
evidently knew nobody. The other follower was younger and far less
respectable-looking.

No one else followed the eccentric lady; but as she descended the steps
she did not even look behind her, as though it were absolutely the same
to her whether anyone were following or not. She laughed and talked
loudly, however, just as before. She was dressed with great taste, but
with rather more magnificence than was needed for the occasion, perhaps.

She walked past the orchestra, to where an open carriage was waiting,
near the road.

The prince had not seen HER for more than three months. All these days
since his arrival from Petersburg he had intended to pay her a visit,
but some mysterious presentiment had restrained him. He could not
picture to himself what impression this meeting with her would make upon
him, though he had often tried to imagine it, with fear and trembling.
One fact was quite certain, and that was that the meeting would be
painful.

Several times during the last six months he had recalled the effect
which the first sight of this face had had upon him, when he only saw
its portrait. He recollected well that even the portrait face had left
but too painful an impression.

That month in the provinces, when he had seen this woman nearly every
day, had affected him so deeply that he could not now look back upon
it calmly. In the very look of this woman there was something which
tortured him. In conversation with Rogojin he had attributed this
sensation to pity--immeasurable pity, and this was the truth. The sight
of the portrait face alone had filled his heart full of the agony of
real sympathy; and this feeling of sympathy, nay, of actual SUFFERING,
for her, had never left his heart since that hour, and was still in full
force. Oh yes, and more powerful than ever!

But the prince was not satisfied with what he had said to Rogojin. Only
at this moment, when she suddenly made her appearance before him, did
he realize to the full the exact emotion which she called up in him, and
which he had not described correctly to Rogojin.

And, indeed, there were no words in which he could have expressed his
horror, yes, HORROR, for he was now fully convinced from his own private
knowledge of her, that the woman was mad.

If, loving a woman above everything in the world, or at least having a
foretaste of the possibility of such love for her, one were suddenly to
behold her on a chain, behind bars and under the lash of a keeper, one
would feel something like what the poor prince now felt.

"What's the matter?" asked Aglaya, in a whisper, giving his sleeve a
little tug.

He turned his head towards her and glanced at her black and (for some
reason) flashing eyes, tried to smile, and then, apparently forgetting
her in an instant, turned to the right once more, and continued to watch
the startling apparition before him.

Nastasia Philipovna was at this moment passing the young ladies' chairs.

Evgenie Pavlovitch continued some apparently extremely funny and
interesting anecdote to Alexandra, speaking quickly and with much
animation. The prince remembered that at this moment Aglaya remarked in
a half-whisper:

"WHAT a--"

She did not finish her indefinite sentence; she restrained herself in a
moment; but it was enough.

Nastasia Philipovna, who up to now had been walking along as though she
had not noticed the Epanchin party, suddenly turned her head in their
direction, as though she had just observed Evgenie Pavlovitch sitting
there for the first time.

"Why, I declare, here he is!" she cried, stopping suddenly. "The man one
can't find with all one's messengers sent about the place, sitting just
under one's nose, exactly where one never thought of looking! I thought
you were sure to be at your uncle's by this time."

Evgenie Pavlovitch flushed up and looked angrily at Nastasia Philipovna,
then turned his back on her.

"What I don't you know about it yet? He doesn't know--imagine that! Why,
he's shot himself. Your uncle shot himself this very morning. I was told
at two this afternoon. Half the town must know it by now. They say there
are three hundred and fifty thousand roubles, government money, missing;
some say five hundred thousand. And I was under the impression that he
would leave you a fortune! He's whistled it all away. A most depraved
old gentleman, really! Well, ta, ta!--bonne chance! Surely you intend
to be off there, don't you? Ha, ha! You've retired from the army in good
time, I see! Plain clothes! Well done, sly rogue! Nonsense! I see--you
knew it all before--I dare say you knew all about it yesterday-"

Although the impudence of this attack, this public proclamation of
intimacy, as it were, was doubtless premeditated, and had its special
object, yet Evgenie Pavlovitch at first seemed to intend to make no
show of observing either his tormentor or her words. But Nastasia's
communication struck him with the force of a thunderclap. On hearing
of his uncle's death he suddenly grew as white as a sheet, and turned
towards his informant.

At this moment, Lizabetha Prokofievna rose swiftly from her seat,
beckoned her companions, and left the place almost at a run.

Only the prince stopped behind for a moment, as though in indecision;
and Evgenie Pavlovitch lingered too, for he had not collected his
scattered wits. But the Epanchins had not had time to get more than
twenty paces away when a scandalous episode occurred. The young officer,
Evgenie Pavlovitch's friend who had been conversing with Aglaya, said
aloud in a great state of indignation:

"She ought to be whipped--that's the only way to deal with creatures
like that--she ought to be whipped!"

This gentleman was a confidant of Evgenie's, and had doubtless heard of
the carriage episode.

Nastasia turned to him. Her eyes flashed; she rushed up to a young man
standing near, whom she did not know in the least, but who happened to
have in his hand a thin cane. Seizing this from him, she brought it with
all her force across the face of her insulter.

All this occurred, of course, in one instant of time.

The young officer, forgetting himself, sprang towards her. Nastasia's
followers were not by her at the moment (the elderly gentleman having
disappeared altogether, and the younger man simply standing aside and
roaring with laughter).

In another moment, of course, the police would have been on the spot,
and it would have gone hard with Nastasia Philipovna had not unexpected
aid appeared.

Muishkin, who was but a couple of steps away, had time to spring forward
and seize the officer's arms from behind.

The officer, tearing himself from the prince's grasp, pushed him so
violently backwards that he staggered a few steps and then subsided into
a chair.

But there were other defenders for Nastasia on the spot by this time.
The gentleman known as the "boxer" now confronted the enraged officer.

"Keller is my name, sir; ex-lieutenant," he said, very loud. "If you
will accept me as champion of the fair sex, I am at your disposal.
English boxing has no secrets from me. I sympathize with you for the
insult you have received, but I can't permit you to raise your hand
against a woman in public. If you prefer to meet me--as would be more
fitting to your rank--in some other manner, of course you understand me,
captain."

But the young officer had recovered himself, and was no longer
listening. At this moment Rogojin appeared, elbowing through the crowd;
he took Nastasia's hand, drew it through his arm, and quickly led her
away. He appeared to be terribly excited; he was trembling all over,
and was as pale as a corpse. As he carried Nastasia off, he turned and
grinned horribly in the officer's face, and with low malice observed:

"Tfu! look what the fellow got! Look at the blood on his cheek! Ha, ha!"

Recollecting himself, however, and seeing at a glance the sort of people
he had to deal with, the officer turned his back on both his opponents,
and courteously, but concealing his face with his handkerchief,
approached the prince, who was now rising from the chair into which he
had fallen.

"Prince Muishkin, I believe? The gentleman to whom I had the honour of
being introduced?"

"She is mad, insane--I assure you, she is mad," replied the prince in
trembling tones, holding out both his hands mechanically towards the
officer.

"I cannot boast of any such knowledge, of course, but I wished to know
your name."

He bowed and retired without waiting for an answer.

Five seconds after the disappearance of the last actor in this scene,
the police arrived. The whole episode had not lasted more than a couple
of minutes. Some of the spectators had risen from their places, and
departed altogether; some merely exchanged their seats for others a
little further off; some were delighted with the occurrence, and talked
and laughed over it for a long time.

In a word, the incident closed as such incidents do, and the band began
to play again. The prince walked away after the Epanchin party. Had
he thought of looking round to the left after he had been pushed so
unceremoniously into the chair, he would have observed Aglaya standing
some twenty yards away. She had stayed to watch the scandalous scene in
spite of her mother's and sisters' anxious cries to her to come away.

Prince S. ran up to her and persuaded her, at last, to come home with
them.

Lizabetha Prokofievna saw that she returned in such a state of agitation
that it was doubtful whether she had even heard their calls. But only a
couple of minutes later, when they had reached the park, Aglaya suddenly
remarked, in her usual calm, indifferent voice:

"I wanted to see how the farce would end."

III.

THE occurrence at the Vauxhall had filled both mother and daughters with
something like horror. In their excitement Lizabetha Prokofievna and the
girls were nearly running all the way home.

In her opinion there was so much disclosed and laid bare by the episode,
that, in spite of the chaotic condition of her mind, she was able to
feel more or less decided on certain points which, up to now, had been
in a cloudy condition.

However, one and all of the party realized that something important
had happened, and that, perhaps fortunately enough, something which had
hitherto been enveloped in the obscurity of guess-work had now begun to
come forth a little from the mists. In spite of Prince S.'s assurances
and explanations, Evgenie Pavlovitch's real character and position were
at last coming to light. He was publicly convicted of intimacy with
"that creature." So thought Lizabetha Prokofievna and her two elder
daughters.

But the real upshot of the business was that the number of riddles to
be solved was augmented. The two girls, though rather irritated at their
mother's exaggerated alarm and haste to depart from the scene, had been
unwilling to worry her at first with questions.

Besides, they could not help thinking that their sister Aglaya probably
knew more about the whole matter than both they and their mother put
together.

Prince S. looked as black as night, and was silent and moody. Mrs.
Epanchin did not say a word to him all the way home, and he did not seem
to observe the fact. Adelaida tried to pump him a little by asking, "who
was the uncle they were talking about, and what was it that had happened
in Petersburg?" But he had merely muttered something disconnected about
"making inquiries," and that "of course it was all nonsense." "Oh, of
course," replied Adelaida, and asked no more questions. Aglaya, too, was
very quiet; and the only remark she made on the way home was that they
were "walking much too fast to be pleasant."

Once she turned and observed the prince hurrying after them. Noticing
his anxiety to catch them up, she smiled ironically, and then looked
back no more. At length, just as they neared the house, General Epanchin
came out and met them; he had only just arrived from town.

His first word was to inquire after Evgenie Pavlovitch. But Lizabetha
stalked past him, and neither looked at him nor answered his question.

He immediately judged from the faces of his daughters and Prince S. that
there was a thunderstorm brewing, and he himself already bore evidences
of unusual perturbation of mind.

He immediately button-holed Prince S., and standing at the front door,
engaged in a whispered conversation with him. By the troubled aspect of
both of them, when they entered the house, and approached Mrs. Epanchin,
it was evident that they had been discussing very disturbing news.

Little by little the family gathered together upstairs in Lizabetha
Prokofievna's apartments, and Prince Muishkin found himself alone on
the verandah when he arrived. He settled himself in a corner and sat
waiting, though he knew not what he expected. It never struck him that
he had better go away, with all this disturbance in the house. He seemed
to have forgotten all the world, and to be ready to sit on where he was
for years on end. From upstairs he caught sounds of excited conversation
every now and then.

He could not say how long he sat there. It grew late and became quite
dark.

Suddenly Aglaya entered the verandah. She seemed to be quite calm,
though a little pale.

Observing the prince, whom she evidently did not expect to see there,
alone in the corner, she smiled, and approached him:

"What are you doing there?" she asked.

The prince muttered something, blushed, and jumped up; but Aglaya
immediately sat down beside him; so he reseated himself.

She looked suddenly, but attentively into his face, then at the window,
as though thinking of something else, and then again at him.

"Perhaps she wants to laugh at me," thought the prince, "but no; for if
she did she certainly would do so."

"Would you like some tea? I'll order some," she said, after a minute or
two of silence.

"N-no thanks, I don't know--"

"Don't know! How can you not know? By-the-by, look here--if someone
were to challenge you to a duel, what should you do? I wished to ask you
this--some time ago--"

"Why? Nobody would ever challenge me to a duel!"

"But if they were to, would you be dreadfully frightened?"

"I dare say I should be--much alarmed!"

"Seriously? Then are you a coward?"

"N-no!--I don't think so. A coward is a man who is afraid and runs away;
the man who is frightened but does not run away, is not quite a coward,"
said the prince with a smile, after a moment's thought.

"And you wouldn't run away?"

"No--I don't think I should run away," replied the prince, laughing
outright at last at Aglaya's questions.

"Though I am a woman, I should certainly not run away for anything,"
said Aglaya, in a slightly pained voice. "However, I see you are
laughing at me and twisting your face up as usual in order to make
yourself look more interesting. Now tell me, they generally shoot at
twenty paces, don't they? At ten, sometimes? I suppose if at ten they
must be either wounded or killed, mustn't they?"

"I don't think they often kill each other at duels."

"They killed Pushkin that way."

"That may have been an accident."

"Not a bit of it; it was a duel to the death, and he was killed."

"The bullet struck so low down that probably his antagonist would never
have aimed at that part of him--people never do; he would have aimed at
his chest or head; so that probably the bullet hit him accidentally. I
have been told this by competent authorities."

"Well, a soldier once told me that they were always ordered to aim at
the middle of the body. So you see they don't aim at the chest or head;
they aim lower on purpose. I asked some officer about this afterwards,
and he said it was perfectly true."

"That is probably when they fire from a long distance."

"Can you shoot at all?"

"No, I have never shot in my life."

"Can't you even load a pistol?"

"No! That is, I understand how it's done, of course, but I have never
done it."

"Then, you don't know how, for it is a matter that needs practice. Now
listen and learn; in the first place buy good powder, not damp (they say
it mustn't be at all damp, but very dry), some fine kind it is--you must
ask for PISTOL powder, not the stuff they load cannons with. They say
one makes the bullets oneself, somehow or other. Have you got a pistol?"

"No--and I don't want one," said the prince, laughing.

