"Oh, what NONSENSE! You must buy one. French or English are the best,
they say. Then take a little powder, about a thimbleful, or perhaps two,
and pour it into the barrel. Better put plenty. Then push in a bit of
felt (it MUST be felt, for some reason or other); you can easily get
a bit off some old mattress, or off a door; it's used to keep the cold
out. Well, when you have pushed the felt down, put the bullet in; do you
hear now? The bullet last and the powder first, not the other way, or
the pistol won't shoot. What are you laughing at? I wish you to buy
a pistol and practise every day, and you must learn to hit a mark for
CERTAIN; will you?"

The prince only laughed. Aglaya stamped her foot with annoyance.

Her serious air, however, during this conversation had surprised him
considerably. He had a feeling that he ought to be asking her something,
that there was something he wanted to find out far more important than
how to load a pistol; but his thoughts had all scattered, and he was
only aware that she was sitting by, him, and talking to him, and that
he was looking at her; as to what she happened to be saying to him, that
did not matter in the least.

The general now appeared on the verandah, coming from upstairs. He was
on his way out, with an expression of determination on his face, and of
preoccupation and worry also.

"Ah! Lef Nicolaievitch, it's you, is it? Where are you off to now?" he
asked, oblivious of the fact that the prince had not showed the least
sign of moving. "Come along with me; I want to say a word or two to
you."

"Au revoir, then!" said Aglaya, holding out her hand to the prince.

It was quite dark now, and Muishkin could not see her face clearly, but
a minute or two later, when he and the general had left the villa, he
suddenly flushed up, and squeezed his right hand tightly.

It appeared that he and the general were going in the same direction. In
spite of the lateness of the hour, the general was hurrying away to talk
to someone upon some important subject. Meanwhile he talked incessantly
but disconnectedly to the prince, and continually brought in the name of
Lizabetha Prokofievna.

If the prince had been in a condition to pay more attention to what
the general was saying, he would have discovered that the latter was
desirous of drawing some information out of him, or indeed of asking him
some question outright; but that he could not make up his mind to come
to the point.

Muishkin was so absent, that from the very first he could not attend
to a word the other was saying; and when the general suddenly stopped
before him with some excited question, he was obliged to confess,
ignominiously, that he did not know in the least what he had been
talking about.

The general shrugged his shoulders.

"How strange everyone, yourself included, has become of late," said
he. "I was telling you that I cannot in the least understand Lizabetha
Prokofievna's ideas and agitations. She is in hysterics up there, and
moans and says that we have been 'shamed and disgraced.' How? Why? When?
By whom? I confess that I am very much to blame myself; I do not conceal
the fact; but the conduct, the outrageous behaviour of this woman, must
really be kept within limits, by the police if necessary, and I am just
on my way now to talk the question over and make some arrangements.
It can all be managed quietly and gently, even kindly, and without the
slightest fuss or scandal. I foresee that the future is pregnant with
events, and that there is much that needs explanation. There is intrigue
in the wind; but if on one side nothing is known, on the other side
nothing will be explained. If I have heard nothing about it, nor have
YOU, nor HE, nor SHE--who HAS heard about it, I should like to know? How
CAN all this be explained except by the fact that half of it is mirage
or moonshine, or some hallucination of that sort?"

"SHE is insane," muttered the prince, suddenly recollecting all that had
passed, with a spasm of pain at his heart.

"I too had that idea, and I slept in peace. But now I see that their
opinion is more correct. I do not believe in the theory of madness! The
woman has no common sense; but she is not only not insane, she is artful
to a degree. Her outburst of this evening about Evgenie's uncle proves
that conclusively. It was VILLAINOUS, simply jesuitical, and it was all
for some special purpose."

"What about Evgenie's uncle?"

"My goodness, Lef Nicolaievitch, why, you can't have heard a single
word I said! Look at me, I'm still trembling all over with the dreadful
shock! It is that that kept me in town so late. Evgenie Pavlovitch's
uncle--"

"Well?" cried the prince.

"Shot himself this morning, at seven o'clock. A respected, eminent old
man of seventy; and exactly point for point as she described it; a sum
of money, a considerable sum of government money, missing!"

"Why, how could she--"

"What, know of it? Ha, ha, ha! Why, there was a whole crowd round her
the moment she appeared on the scenes here. You know what sort of people
surround her nowadays, and solicit the honour of her 'acquaintance.'
Of course she might easily have heard the news from someone coming from
town. All Petersburg, if not all Pavlofsk, knows it by now. Look at the
slyness of her observation about Evgenie's uniform! I mean, her remark
that he had retired just in time! There's a venomous hint for you,
if you like! No, no! there's no insanity there! Of course I refuse
to believe that Evgenie Pavlovitch could have known beforehand of the
catastrophe; that is, that at such and such a day at seven o'clock, and
all that; but he might well have had a presentiment of the truth. And
I--all of us--Prince S. and everybody, believed that he was to inherit
a large fortune from this uncle. It's dreadful, horrible! Mind, I don't
suspect Evgenie of anything, be quite clear on that point; but the
thing is a little suspicious, nevertheless. Prince S. can't get over it.
Altogether it is a very extraordinary combination of circumstances."

"What suspicion attaches to Evgenie Pavlovitch?"

"Oh, none at all! He has behaved very well indeed. I didn't mean to
drop any sort of hint. His own fortune is intact, I believe. Lizabetha
Prokofievna, of course, refuses to listen to anything. That's the worst
of it all, these family catastrophes or quarrels, or whatever you like
to call them. You know, prince, you are a friend of the family, so I
don't mind telling you; it now appears that Evgenie Pavlovitch proposed
to Aglaya a month ago, and was refused."

"Impossible!" cried the prince.

"Why? Do you know anything about it? Look here," continued the general,
more agitated than ever, and trembling with excitement, "maybe I have
been letting the cat out of the bag too freely with you, if so, it
is because you are--that sort of man, you know! Perhaps you have some
special information?"

"I know nothing about Evgenie Pavlovitch!" said the prince.

"Nor do I! They always try to bury me underground when there's anything
going on; they don't seem to reflect that it is unpleasant to a man
to be treated so! I won't stand it! We have just had a terrible
scene!--mind, I speak to you as I would to my own son! Aglaya laughs at
her mother. Her sisters guessed about Evgenie having proposed and been
rejected, and told Lizabetha.

"I tell you, my dear fellow, Aglaya is such an extraordinary, such a
self-willed, fantastical little creature, you wouldn't believe it! Every
high quality, every brilliant trait of heart and mind, are to be
found in her, and, with it all, so much caprice and mockery, such wild
fancies--indeed, a little devil! She has just been laughing at her
mother to her very face, and at her sisters, and at Prince S., and
everybody--and of course she always laughs at me! You know I love the
child--I love her even when she laughs at me, and I believe the wild
little creature has a special fondness for me for that very reason. She
is fonder of me than any of the others. I dare swear she has had a
good laugh at YOU before now! You were having a quiet talk just now, I
observed, after all the thunder and lightning upstairs. She was sitting
with you just as though there had been no row at all."

The prince blushed painfully in the darkness, and closed his right hand
tightly, but he said nothing.

"My dear good Prince Lef Nicolaievitch," began the general again,
suddenly, "both I and Lizabetha Prokofievna--(who has begun to respect
you once more, and me through you, goodness knows why!)--we both love
you very sincerely, and esteem you, in spite of any appearances to the
contrary. But you'll admit what a riddle it must have been for us when
that calm, cold, little spitfire, Aglaya--(for she stood up to her
mother and answered her questions with inexpressible contempt, and mine
still more so, because, like a fool, I thought it my duty to assert
myself as head of the family)--when Aglaya stood up of a sudden and
informed us that 'that madwoman' (strangely enough, she used exactly the
same expression as you did) 'has taken it into her head to marry me
to Prince Lef Nicolaievitch, and therefore is doing her best to choke
Evgenie Pavlovitch off, and rid the house of him.' That's what she said.
She would not give the slightest explanation; she burst out laughing,
banged the door, and went away. We all stood there with our mouths open.
Well, I was told afterwards of your little passage with Aglaya this
afternoon, and-and--dear prince--you are a good, sensible fellow, don't
be angry if I speak out--she is laughing at you, my boy! She is enjoying
herself like a child, at your expense, and therefore, since she is a
child, don't be angry with her, and don't think anything of it. I assure
you, she is simply making a fool of you, just as she does with one and
all of us out of pure lack of something better to do. Well--good-bye!
You know our feelings, don't you--our sincere feelings for yourself?
They are unalterable, you know, dear boy, under all circumstances,
but--Well, here we part; I must go down to the right. Rarely have I sat
so uncomfortably in my saddle, as they say, as I now sit. And people
talk of the charms of a country holiday!"

Left to himself at the cross-roads, the prince glanced around him,
quickly crossed the road towards the lighted window of a neighbouring
house, and unfolded a tiny scrap of paper which he had held clasped in
his right hand during the whole of his conversation with the general.

He read the note in the uncertain rays that fell from the window. It was
as follows:

"Tomorrow morning, I shall be at the green bench in the park at seven,
and shall wait there for you. I have made up my mind to speak to you
about a most important matter which closely concerns yourself.

"P.S.--I trust that you will not show this note to anyone. Though I
am ashamed of giving you such instructions, I feel that I must do so,
considering what you are. I therefore write the words, and blush for
your simple character.

"P.P.S.--It is the same green bench that I showed you before. There!
aren't you ashamed of yourself? I felt that it was necessary to repeat
even that information."

The note was written and folded anyhow, evidently in a great hurry, and
probably just before Aglaya had come down to the verandah.

In inexpressible agitation, amounting almost to fear, the prince slipped
quickly away from the window, away from the light, like a frightened
thief, but as he did so he collided violently with some gentleman who
seemed to spring from the earth at his feet.

"I was watching for you, prince," said the individual.

"Is that you, Keller?" said the prince, in surprise.

"Yes, I've been looking for you. I waited for you at the Epanchins'
house, but of course I could not come in. I dogged you from behind
as you walked along with the general. Well, prince, here is Keller,
absolutely at your service--command him!--ready to sacrifice
himself--even to die in case of need."

"But-why?"

"Oh, why?--Of course you'll be challenged! That was young Lieutenant
Moloftsoff. I know him, or rather of him; he won't pass an insult. He
will take no notice of Rogojin and myself, and, therefore, you are the
only one left to account for. You'll have to pay the piper, prince. He
has been asking about you, and undoubtedly his friend will call on you
tomorrow--perhaps he is at your house already. If you would do me the
honour to have me for a second, prince, I should be happy. That's why I
have been looking for you now."

"Duel! You've come to talk about a duel, too!" The prince burst
out laughing, to the great astonishment of Keller. He laughed
unrestrainedly, and Keller, who had been on pins and needles, and in a
fever of excitement to offer himself as "second," was very near being
offended.

"You caught him by the arms, you know, prince. No man of proper pride
can stand that sort of treatment in public."

"Yes, and he gave me a fearful dig in the chest," cried the prince,
still laughing. "What are we to fight about? I shall beg his pardon,
that's all. But if we must fight--we'll fight! Let him have a shot at
me, by all means; I should rather like it. Ha, ha, ha! I know how to
load a pistol now; do you know how to load a pistol, Keller? First, you
have to buy the powder, you know; it mustn't be wet, and it mustn't be
that coarse stuff that they load cannons with--it must be pistol powder.
Then you pour the powder in, and get hold of a bit of felt from some
door, and then shove the bullet in. But don't shove the bullet in before
the powder, because the thing wouldn't go off--do you hear, Keller, the
thing wouldn't go off! Ha, ha, ha! Isn't that a grand reason, Keller,
my friend, eh? Do you know, my dear fellow, I really must kiss you, and
embrace you, this very moment. Ha, ha! How was it you so suddenly popped
up in front of me as you did? Come to my house as soon as you can, and
we'll have some champagne. We'll all get drunk! Do you know I have a
dozen of champagne in Lebedeff's cellar? Lebedeff sold them to me the
day after I arrived. I took the lot. We'll invite everybody! Are you
going to do any sleeping tonight?"

"As much as usual, prince--why?"

"Pleasant dreams then--ha, ha!"

The prince crossed the road, and disappeared into the park, leaving the
astonished Keller in a state of ludicrous wonder. He had never before
seen the prince in such a strange condition of mind, and could not have
imagined the possibility of it.

"Fever, probably," he said to himself, "for the man is all nerves, and
this business has been a little too much for him. He is not AFRAID,
that's clear; that sort never funks! H'm! champagne! That was an
interesting item of news, at all events!--Twelve bottles! Dear me,
that's a very respectable little stock indeed! I bet anything Lebedeff
lent somebody money on deposit of this dozen of champagne. Hum! he's a
nice fellow, is this prince! I like this sort of man. Well, I needn't be
wasting time here, and if it's a case of champagne, why--there's no time
like the present!"

That the prince was almost in a fever was no more than the truth. He
wandered about the park for a long while, and at last came to himself in
a lonely avenue. He was vaguely conscious that he had already paced this
particular walk--from that large, dark tree to the bench at the other
end--about a hundred yards altogether--at least thirty times backwards
and forwards.

As to recollecting what he had been thinking of all that time, he could
not. He caught himself, however, indulging in one thought which made him
roar with laughter, though there was nothing really to laugh at in it;
but he felt that he must laugh, and go on laughing.

It struck him that the idea of the duel might not have occurred to
Keller alone, but that his lesson in the art of pistol-loading might
have been not altogether accidental! "Pooh! nonsense!" he said to
himself, struck by another thought, of a sudden. "Why, she was immensely
surprised to find me there on the verandah, and laughed and talked about
TEA! And yet she had this little note in her hand, therefore she must
have known that I was sitting there. So why was she surprised? Ha, ha,
ha!"

He pulled the note out and kissed it; then paused and reflected. "How
strange it all is! how strange!" he muttered, melancholy enough now. In
moments of great joy, he invariably felt a sensation of melancholy come
over him--he could not tell why.

He looked intently around him, and wondered why he had come here; he was
very tired, so he approached the bench and sat down on it. Around him
was profound silence; the music in the Vauxhall was over. The park
seemed quite empty, though it was not, in reality, later than half-past
eleven. It was a quiet, warm, clear night--a real Petersburg night of
early June; but in the dense avenue, where he was sitting, it was almost
pitch dark.

If anyone had come up at this moment and told him that he was in love,
passionately in love, he would have rejected the idea with astonishment,
and, perhaps, with irritation. And if anyone had added that Aglaya's
note was a love-letter, and that it contained an appointment to a
lover's rendezvous, he would have blushed with shame for the speaker,
and, probably, have challenged him to a duel.

All this would have been perfectly sincere on his part. He had never
for a moment entertained the idea of the possibility of this girl loving
him, or even of such a thing as himself falling in love with her. The
possibility of being loved himself, "a man like me," as he put it, he
ranked among ridiculous suppositions. It appeared to him that it was
simply a joke on Aglaya's part, if there really were anything in it at
all; but that seemed to him quite natural. His preoccupation was caused
by something different.

As to the few words which the general had let slip about Aglaya laughing
at everybody, and at himself most of all--he entirely believed them. He
did not feel the slightest sensation of offence; on the contrary, he was
quite certain that it was as it should be.

His whole thoughts were now as to next morning early; he would see
her; he would sit by her on that little green bench, and listen to how
pistols were loaded, and look at her. He wanted nothing more.

The question as to what she might have to say of special interest to
himself occurred to him once or twice. He did not doubt, for a moment,
that she really had some such subject of conversation in store, but so
very little interested in the matter was he that it did not strike him
to wonder what it could be. The crunch of gravel on the path suddenly
caused him to raise his head.

A man, whose face it was difficult to see in the gloom, approached the
bench, and sat down beside him. The prince peered into his face, and
recognized the livid features of Rogojin.

"I knew you'd be wandering about somewhere here. I didn't have to look
for you very long," muttered the latter between his teeth.

It was the first time they had met since the encounter on the staircase
at the hotel.

Painfully surprised as he was at this sudden apparition of Rogojin,
the prince, for some little while, was unable to collect his thoughts.
Rogojin, evidently, saw and understood the impression he had made; and
though he seemed more or less confused at first, yet he began talking
with what looked like assumed ease and freedom. However, the prince soon
changed his mind on this score, and thought that there was not only no
affectation of indifference, but that Rogojin was not even particularly
agitated. If there were a little apparent awkwardness, it was only in
his words and gestures. The man could not change his heart.

"How did you--find me here?" asked the prince for the sake of saying
something.

"Keller told me (I found him at your place) that you were in the park.
'Of course he is!' I thought."

"Why so?" asked the prince uneasily.

Rogojin smiled, but did not explain.

"I received your letter, Lef Nicolaievitch--what's the good of all
that?--It's no use, you know. I've come to you from HER,--she bade me
tell you that she must see you, she has something to say to you. She
told me to find you today."

"I'll come tomorrow. Now I'm going home--are you coming to my house?"

"Why should I? I've given you the message.--Goodbye!"

"Won't you come?" asked the prince in a gentle voice.

"What an extraordinary man you are! I wonder at you!" Rogojin laughed
sarcastically.

"Why do you hate me so?" asked the prince, sadly. "You know yourself
that all you suspected is quite unfounded. I felt you were still angry
with me, though. Do you know why? Because you tried to kill me--that's
why you can't shake off your wrath against me. I tell you that I only
remember the Parfen Rogojin with whom I exchanged crosses, and vowed
brotherhood. I wrote you this in yesterday's letter, in order that you
might forget all that madness on your part, and that you might not feel
called to talk about it when we met. Why do you avoid me? Why do you
hold your hand back from me? I tell you again, I consider all that has
passed a delirium, an insane dream. I can understand all you did,
and all you felt that day, as if it were myself. What you were then
imagining was not the case, and could never be the case. Why, then,
should there be anger between us?"

"You don't know what anger is!" laughed Rogojin, in reply to the
prince's heated words.

He had moved a pace or two away, and was hiding his hands behind him.

"No, it is impossible for me to come to your house again," he added
slowly.

"Why? Do you hate me so much as all that?"

"I don't love you, Lef Nicolaievitch, and, therefore, what would be
the use of my coming to see you? You are just like a child--you want a
plaything, and it must be taken out and given you--and then you don't
know how to work it. You are simply repeating all you said in your
letter, and what's the use? Of course I believe every word you say, and
I know perfectly well that you neither did or ever can deceive me in
any way, and yet, I don't love you. You write that you've forgotten
everything, and only remember your brother Parfen, with whom you
exchanged crosses, and that you don't remember anything about the
Rogojin who aimed a knife at your throat. What do you know about my
feelings, eh?" (Rogojin laughed disagreeably.) "Here you are holding out
your brotherly forgiveness to me for a thing that I have perhaps never
repented of in the slightest degree. I did not think of it again all
that evening; all my thoughts were centred on something else--"

"Not think of it again? Of course you didn't!" cried the prince. "And I
dare swear that you came straight away down here to Pavlofsk to listen
to the music and dog her about in the crowd, and stare at her, just as
you did today. There's nothing surprising in that! If you hadn't been in
that condition of mind that you could think of nothing but one subject,
you would, probably, never have raised your knife against me. I had a
presentiment of what you would do, that day, ever since I saw you first
in the morning. Do you know yourself what you looked like? I knew
you would try to murder me even at the very moment when we exchanged
crosses. What did you take me to your mother for? Did you think to stay
your hand by doing so? Perhaps you did not put your thoughts into words,
but you and I were thinking the same thing, or feeling the same thing
looming over us, at the same moment. What should you think of me now if
you had not raised your knife to me--the knife which God averted from my
throat? I would have been guilty of suspecting you all the same--and you
would have intended the murder all the same; therefore we should have
been mutually guilty in any case. Come, don't frown; you needn't laugh
at me, either. You say you haven't 'repented.' Repented! You probably
couldn't, if you were to try; you dislike me too much for that. Why,
if I were an angel of light, and as innocent before you as a babe, you
would still loathe me if you believed that SHE loved me, instead of
loving yourself. That's jealousy--that is the real jealousy.

"But do you know what I have been thinking out during this last week,
Parfen? I'll tell you. What if she loves you now better than anyone? And
what if she torments you BECAUSE she loves you, and in proportion to her
love for you, so she torments you the more? She won't tell you this, of
course; you must have eyes to see. Why do you suppose she consents to
marry you? She must have a reason, and that reason she will tell you
some day. Some women desire the kind of love you give her, and she is
probably one of these. Your love and your wild nature impress her. Do
you know that a woman is capable of driving a man crazy almost, with
her cruelties and mockeries, and feels not one single pang of regret,
because she looks at him and says to herself, 'There! I'll torment this
man nearly into his grave, and then, oh! how I'll compensate him for it
all with my love!'"

Rogojin listened to the end, and then burst out laughing:

"Why, prince, I declare you must have had a taste of this sort of thing
yourself--haven't you? I have heard tell of something of the kind, you
know; is it true?"

"What? What can you have heard?" said the prince, stammering.

Rogojin continued to laugh loudly. He had listened to the prince's
speech with curiosity and some satisfaction. The speaker's impulsive
warmth had surprised and even comforted him.

"Why, I've not only heard of it; I see it for myself," he said. "When
have you ever spoken like that before? It wasn't like yourself, prince.
Why, if I hadn't heard this report about you, I should never have come
all this way into the park--at midnight, too!"

"I don't understand you in the least, Parfen."

"Oh, SHE told me all about it long ago, and tonight I saw for myself.
I saw you at the music, you know, and whom you were sitting with. She
swore to me yesterday, and again today, that you are madly in love with
Aglaya Ivanovna. But that's all the same to me, prince, and it's not my
affair at all; for if you have ceased to love HER, SHE has not ceased to
love YOU. You know, of course, that she wants to marry you to that girl?
She's sworn to it! Ha, ha! She says to me, 'Until then I won't marry
you. When they go to church, we'll go too-and not before.' What on earth
does she mean by it? I don't know, and I never did. Either she loves you
without limits or--yet, if she loves you, why does she wish to marry
you to another girl? She says, 'I want to see him happy,' which is to
say--she loves you."

"I wrote, and I say to you once more, that she is not in her right
mind," said the prince, who had listened with anguish to what Rogojin
said.

"Goodness knows--you may be wrong there! At all events, she named the
day this evening, as we left the gardens. 'In three weeks,' says she,
'and perhaps sooner, we shall be married.' She swore to it, took off her
cross and kissed it. So it all depends upon you now, prince, You see!
Ha, ha!"

"That's all madness. What you say about me, Parfen, never can and never
will be. Tomorrow, I shall come and see you--"

"How can she be mad," Rogojin interrupted, "when she is sane enough for
other people and only mad for you? How can she write letters to HER, if
she's mad? If she were insane they would observe it in her letters."

"What letters?" said the prince, alarmed.

"She writes to HER--and the girl reads the letters. Haven't you
heard?--You are sure to hear; she's sure to show you the letters
herself."

"I won't believe this!" cried the prince.

"Why, prince, you've only gone a few steps along this road, I perceive.
You are evidently a mere beginner. Wait a bit! Before long, you'll have
your own detectives, you'll watch day and night, and you'll know every
little thing that goes on there--that is, if--"

"Drop that subject, Rogojin, and never mention it again. And listen:
as I have sat here, and talked, and listened, it has suddenly struck me
that tomorrow is my birthday. It must be about twelve o'clock, now; come
home with me--do, and we'll see the day in! We'll have some wine, and
you shall wish me--I don't know what--but you, especially you, must
wish me a good wish, and I shall wish you full happiness in return.
Otherwise, hand me my cross back again. You didn't return it to me next
day. Haven't you got it on now?"

"Yes, I have," said Rogojin.

"Come along, then. I don't wish to meet my new year without you--my new
life, I should say, for a new life is beginning for me. Did you know,
Parfen, that a new life had begun for me?"

"I see for myself that it is so--and I shall tell HER. But you are not
quite yourself, Lef Nicolaievitch."

IV.

THE prince observed with great surprise, as he approached his villa,
accompanied by Rogojin, that a large number of people were assembled on
his verandah, which was brilliantly lighted up. The company seemed merry
and were noisily laughing and talking--even quarrelling, to judge from
the sounds. At all events they were clearly enjoying themselves, and
the prince observed further on closer investigation--that all had been
drinking champagne. To judge from the lively condition of some of the
party, it was to be supposed that a considerable quantity of champagne
had been consumed already.

All the guests were known to the prince; but the curious part of the
matter was that they had all arrived on the same evening, as though with
one accord, although he had only himself recollected the fact that it
was his birthday a few moments since.

"You must have told somebody you were going to trot out the champagne,
and that's why they are all come!" muttered Rogojin, as the two entered
the verandah. "We know all about that! You've only to whistle and they
come up in shoals!" he continued, almost angrily. He was doubtless
thinking of his own late experiences with his boon companions.

All surrounded the prince with exclamations of welcome, and, on hearing
that it was his birthday, with cries of congratulation and delight; many
of them were very noisy.

The presence of certain of those in the room surprised the prince
vastly, but the guest whose advent filled him with the greatest
wonder--almost amounting to alarm--was Evgenie Pavlovitch. The prince
could not believe his eyes when he beheld the latter, and could not help
thinking that something was wrong.

Lebedeff ran up promptly to explain the arrival of all these gentlemen.
He was himself somewhat intoxicated, but the prince gathered from his
long-winded periods that the party had assembled quite naturally, and
accidentally.

First of all Hippolyte had arrived, early in the evening, and feeling
decidedly better, had determined to await the prince on the verandah.
There Lebedeff had joined him, and his household had followed--that is,
his daughters and General Ivolgin. Burdovsky had brought Hippolyte, and
stayed on with him. Gania and Ptitsin had dropped in accidentally later
on; then came Keller, and he and Colia insisted on having champagne.
Evgenie Pavlovitch had only dropped in half an hour or so ago. Lebedeff
had served the champagne readily.

"My own though, prince, my own, mind," he said, "and there'll be some
supper later on; my daughter is getting it ready now. Come and sit down,
prince, we are all waiting for you, we want you with us. Fancy what we
have been discussing! You know the question, 'to be or not to be,'--out
of Hamlet! A contemporary theme! Quite up-to-date! Mr. Hippolyte has
been eloquent to a degree. He won't go to bed, but he has only drunk a
little champagne, and that can't do him any harm. Come along, prince,
and settle the question. Everyone is waiting for you, sighing for the
light of your luminous intelligence..."

The prince noticed the sweet, welcoming look on Vera Lebedeff's face, as
she made her way towards him through the crowd. He held out his hand to
her. She took it, blushing with delight, and wished him "a happy life
from that day forward." Then she ran off to the kitchen, where her
presence was necessary to help in the preparations for supper. Before
the prince's arrival she had spent some time on the terrace, listening
eagerly to the conversation, though the visitors, mostly under the
influence of wine, were discussing abstract subjects far beyond her
comprehension. In the next room her younger sister lay on a wooden
chest, sound asleep, with her mouth wide open; but the boy, Lebedeff's
son, had taken up his position close beside Colia and Hippolyte, his
face lit up with interest in the conversation of his father and the
rest, to which he would willingly have listened for ten hours at a
stretch.

"I have waited for you on purpose, and am very glad to see you arrive so
happy," said Hippolyte, when the prince came forward to press his hand,
immediately after greeting Vera.

"And how do you know that I am 'so happy'?

"I can see it by your face! Say 'how do you do' to the others, and
come and sit down here, quick--I've been waiting for you!" he added,
accentuating the fact that he had waited. On the prince's asking, "Will
it not be injurious to you to sit out so late?" he replied that he could
not believe that he had thought himself dying three days or so ago, for
he never had felt better than this evening.

Burdovsky next jumped up and explained that he had come in by accident,
having escorted Hippolyte from town. He murmured that he was glad he
had "written nonsense" in his letter, and then pressed the prince's hand
warmly and sat down again.

The prince approached Evgenie Pavlovitch last of all. The latter
immediately took his arm.

"I have a couple of words to say to you," he began, "and those on a very
important matter; let's go aside for a minute or two."

"Just a couple of words!" whispered another voice in the prince's other
ear, and another hand took his other arm. Muishkin turned, and to his
great surprise observed a red, flushed face and a droll-looking figure
which he recognized at once as that of Ferdishenko. Goodness knows where
he had turned up from!

"Do you remember Ferdishenko?" he asked.

"Where have you dropped from?" cried the prince.

"He is sorry for his sins now, prince," cried Keller. "He did not
want to let you know he was here; he was hidden over there in the
corner,--but he repents now, he feels his guilt."

"Why, what has he done?"

"I met him outside and brought him in--he's a gentleman who doesn't
often allow his friends to see him, of late--but he's sorry now."

"Delighted, I'm sure!--I'll come back directly, gentlemen,--sit down
there with the others, please,--excuse me one moment," said the host,
getting away with difficulty in order to follow Evgenie.

"You are very gay here," began the latter, "and I have had quite
a pleasant half-hour while I waited for you. Now then, my dear Lef
Nicolaievitch, this is what's the matter. I've arranged it all with
Moloftsoff, and have just come in to relieve your mind on that score.
You need be under no apprehensions. He was very sensible, as he should
be, of course, for I think he was entirely to blame himself."

"What Moloftsoff?"

"The young fellow whose arms you held, don't you know? He was so wild
with you that he was going to send a friend to you tomorrow morning."

"What nonsense!"

"Of course it is nonsense, and in nonsense it would have ended,
doubtless; but you know these fellows, they--"

"Excuse me, but I think you must have something else that you wished to
speak about, Evgenie Pavlovitch?"

"Of course, I have!" said the other, laughing. "You see, my dear fellow,
tomorrow, very early in the morning, I must be off to town about this
unfortunate business (my uncle, you know!). Just imagine, my dear sir, it
is all true--word for word--and, of course, everybody knew it excepting
myself. All this has been such a blow to me that I have not managed to
call in at the Epanchins'. Tomorrow I shall not see them either, because
I shall be in town. I may not be here for three days or more; in a word,
my affairs are a little out of gear. But though my town business is,
of course, most pressing, still I determined not to go away until I had
seen you, and had a clear understanding with you upon certain points;
and that without loss of time. I will wait now, if you will allow me,
until the company departs; I may just as well, for I have nowhere else
to go to, and I shall certainly not do any sleeping tonight; I'm far too
excited. And finally, I must confess that, though I know it is bad form
to pursue a man in this way, I have come to beg your friendship, my
dear prince. You are an unusual sort of a person; you don't lie at every
step, as some men do; in fact, you don't lie at all, and there is a
matter in which I need a true and sincere friend, for I really may claim
to be among the number of bona fide unfortunates just now."

He laughed again.

"But the trouble is," said the prince, after a slight pause for
reflection, "that goodness only knows when this party will break up.
Hadn't we better stroll into the park? I'll excuse myself, there's no
danger of their going away."

"No, no! I have my reasons for wishing them not to suspect us of being
engaged in any specially important conversation. There are gentry
present who are a little too much interested in us. You are not aware of
that perhaps, prince? It will be a great deal better if they see that
we are friendly just in an ordinary way. They'll all go in a couple of
hours, and then I'll ask you to give me twenty minutes-half an hour at
most."

"By all means! I assure you I am delighted--you need not have entered
into all these explanations. As for your remarks about friendship with
me--thanks, very much indeed. You must excuse my being a little absent
this evening. Do you know, I cannot somehow be attentive to anything
just now?"

"I see, I see," said Evgenie, smiling gently. His mirth seemed very near
the surface this evening.

"What do you see?" said the prince, startled.

"I don't want you to suspect that I have simply come here to deceive
you and pump information out of you!" said Evgenie, still smiling, and
without making any direct reply to the question.

"Oh, but I haven't the slightest doubt that you did come to pump me,"
said the prince, laughing himself, at last; "and I dare say you are
quite prepared to deceive me too, so far as that goes. But what of that?
I'm not afraid of you; besides, you'll hardly believe it, I feel
as though I really didn't care a scrap one way or the other, just
now!--And-and-and as you are a capital fellow, I am convinced of that, I
dare say we really shall end by being good friends. I like you very much
Evgenie Pavlovitch; I consider you a very good fellow indeed."

"Well, in any case, you are a most delightful man to have to deal with,
be the business what it may," concluded Evgenie. "Come along now, I'll
drink a glass to your health. I'm charmed to have entered into alliance
with you. By-the-by," he added suddenly, "has this young Hippolyte come
down to stay with you?"

"Yes."

"He's not going to die at once, I should think, is he?"

"Why?"

"Oh, I don't know. I've been half an hour here with him, and he--"

Hippolyte had been waiting for the prince all this time, and had never
ceased looking at him and Evgenie Pavlovitch as they conversed in the
corner. He became much excited when they approached the table once more.
He was disturbed in his mind, it seemed; perspiration stood in large
drops on his forehead; in his gleaming eyes it was easy to read
impatience and agitation; his gaze wandered from face to face of those
present, and from object to object in the room, apparently without aim.
He had taken a part, and an animated one, in the noisy conversation of
the company; but his animation was clearly the outcome of fever. His
talk was almost incoherent; he would break off in the middle of a
sentence which he had begun with great interest, and forget what he had
been saying. The prince discovered to his dismay that Hippolyte had been
allowed to drink two large glasses of champagne; the one now standing by
him being the third. All this he found out afterwards; at the moment he
did not notice anything, very particularly.

"Do you know I am specially glad that today is your birthday!" cried
Hippolyte.

"Why?"

"You'll soon see. D'you know I had a feeling that there would be a lot
of people here tonight? It's not the first time that my presentiments
have been fulfilled. I wish I had known it was your birthday, I'd have
brought you a present--perhaps I have got a present for you! Who knows?
Ha, ha! How long is it now before daylight?"

"Not a couple of hours," said Ptitsin, looking at his watch. "What's the
good of daylight now? One can read all night in the open air without
it," said someone.

"The good of it! Well, I want just to see a ray of the sun," said
Hippolyte. "Can one drink to the sun's health, do you think, prince?"

"Oh, I dare say one can; but you had better be calm and lie down,
Hippolyte--that's much more important.

"You are always preaching about resting; you are a regular nurse to me,
prince. As soon as the sun begins to 'resound' in the sky--what poet
said that? 'The sun resounded in the sky.' It is beautiful, though
there's no sense in it!--then we will go to bed. Lebedeff, tell me, is
the sun the source of life? What does the source, or 'spring,' of life
really mean in the Apocalypse? You have heard of the 'Star that is
called Wormwood,' prince?"

"I have heard that Lebedeff explains it as the railroads that cover
Europe like a net."

Everybody laughed, and Lebedeff got up abruptly.

"No! Allow me, that is not what we are discussing!" he cried, waving
his hand to impose silence. "Allow me! With these gentlemen... all
these gentlemen," he added, suddenly addressing the prince, "on certain
points... that is..." He thumped the table repeatedly, and the laughter
increased. Lebedeff was in his usual evening condition, and had just
ended a long and scientific argument, which had left him excited and
irritable. On such occasions he was apt to evince a supreme contempt for
his opponents.

"It is not right! Half an hour ago, prince, it was agreed among us that
no one should interrupt, no one should laugh, that each person was to
express his thoughts freely; and then at the end, when everyone had
spoken, objections might be made, even by the atheists. We chose the
general as president. Now without some such rule and order, anyone might
be shouted down, even in the loftiest and most profound thought...."

"Go on! Go on! Nobody is going to interrupt you!" cried several voices.

"Speak, but keep to the point!"

"What is this 'star'?" asked another.

"I have no idea," replied General Ivolgin, who presided with much
gravity.

"I love these arguments, prince," said Keller, also more than half
intoxicated, moving restlessly in his chair. "Scientific and political."
Then, turning suddenly towards Evgenie Pavlovitch, who was seated near
him: "Do you know, I simply adore reading the accounts of the debates in
the English parliament. Not that the discussions themselves interest
me; I am not a politician, you know; but it delights me to see how they
address each other 'the noble lord who agrees with me,' 'my honourable
opponent who astonished Europe with his proposal,' 'the noble viscount
sitting opposite'--all these expressions, all this parliamentarism of
a free people, has an enormous attraction for me. It fascinates me,
prince. I have always been an artist in the depths of my soul, I assure
you, Evgenie Pavlovitch."

"Do you mean to say," cried Gania, from the other corner, "do you mean
to say that railways are accursed inventions, that they are a source of
ruin to humanity, a poison poured upon the earth to corrupt the springs
of life?"

Gavrila Ardalionovitch was in high spirits that evening, and it seemed
to the prince that his gaiety was mingled with triumph. Of course he was
only joking with Lebedeff, meaning to egg him on, but he grew excited
himself at the same time.

"Not the railways, oh dear, no!" replied Lebedeff, with a mixture of
violent anger and extreme enjoyment. "Considered alone, the railways
will not pollute the springs of life, but as a whole they are accursed.
The whole tendency of our latest centuries, in its scientific and
materialistic aspect, is most probably accursed."

"Is it certainly accursed?... or do you only mean it might be? That is
an important point," said Evgenie Pavlovitch.

"It is accursed, certainly accursed!" replied the clerk, vehemently.

"Don't go so fast, Lebedeff; you are much milder in the morning," said
Ptitsin, smiling.

"But, on the other hand, more frank in the evening! In the evening
sincere and frank," repeated Lebedeff, earnestly. "More candid, more
exact, more honest, more honourable, and... although I may show you my
weak side, I challenge you all; you atheists, for instance! How are you
going to save the world? How find a straight road of progress, you men
of science, of industry, of cooperation, of trades unions, and all the
rest? How are you going to save it, I say? By what? By credit? What is
credit? To what will credit lead you?"

"You are too inquisitive," remarked Evgenie Pavlovitch.

"Well, anyone who does not interest himself in questions such as this
is, in my opinion, a mere fashionable dummy."

"But it will lead at least to solidarity, and balance of interests,"
said Ptitsin.

"You will reach that with nothing to help you but credit? Without
recourse to any moral principle, having for your foundation only
individual selfishness, and the satisfaction of material desires?
Universal peace, and the happiness of mankind as a whole, being the
result! Is it really so that I may understand you, sir?"

"But the universal necessity of living, of drinking, of eating--in
short, the whole scientific conviction that this necessity can only be
satisfied by universal co-operation and the solidarity of interests--is,
it seems to me, a strong enough idea to serve as a basis, so to speak,
and a 'spring of life,' for humanity in future centuries," said Gavrila
Ardalionovitch, now thoroughly roused.

"The necessity of eating and drinking, that is to say, solely the
instinct of self-preservation..."

"Is not that enough? The instinct of self-preservation is the normal law
of humanity..."

"Who told you that?" broke in Evgenie Pavlovitch.

"It is a law, doubtless, but a law neither more nor less normal than
that of destruction, even self-destruction. Is it possible that
the whole normal law of humanity is contained in this sentiment of
self-preservation?"

"Ah!" cried Hippolyte, turning towards Evgenie Pavlovitch, and looking
at him with a queer sort of curiosity.

Then seeing that Radomski was laughing, he began to laugh himself,
nudged Colia, who was sitting beside him, with his elbow, and again
asked what time it was. He even pulled Colia's silver watch out of his
hand, and looked at it eagerly. Then, as if he had forgotten everything,
he stretched himself out on the sofa, put his hands behind his head, and
looked up at the sky. After a minute or two he got up and came back
to the table to listen to Lebedeff's outpourings, as the latter
passionately commentated on Evgenie Pavlovitch's paradox.

"That is an artful and traitorous idea. A smart notion," vociferated
the clerk, "thrown out as an apple of discord. But it is just. You are a
scoffer, a man of the world, a cavalry officer, and, though not without
brains, you do not realize how profound is your thought, nor how true.
Yes, the laws of self-preservation and of self-destruction are equally
powerful in this world. The devil will hold his empire over humanity
until a limit of time which is still unknown. You laugh? You do not
believe in the devil? Scepticism as to the devil is a French idea, and
it is also a frivolous idea. Do you know who the devil is? Do you know
his name? Although you don't know his name you make a mockery of his
form, following the example of Voltaire. You sneer at his hoofs, at
his tail, at his horns--all of them the produce of your imagination! In
reality the devil is a great and terrible spirit, with neither
hoofs, nor tail, nor horns; it is you who have endowed him with these
attributes! But... he is not the question just now!"

"How do you know he is not the question now?" cried Hippolyte, laughing
hysterically.

"Another excellent idea, and worth considering!" replied Lebedeff. "But,
again, that is not the question. The question at this moment is whether
we have not weakened 'the springs of life' by the extension..."

"Of railways?" put in Colia eagerly.

"Not railways, properly speaking, presumptuous youth, but the general
tendency of which railways may be considered as the outward expression
and symbol. We hurry and push and hustle, for the good of humanity!
'The world is becoming too noisy, too commercial!' groans some solitary
thinker. 'Undoubtedly it is, but the noise of waggons bearing bread to
starving humanity is of more value than tranquillity of soul,' replies
another triumphantly, and passes on with an air of pride. As for me, I
don't believe in these waggons bringing bread to humanity. For, founded
on no moral principle, these may well, even in the act of carrying bread
to humanity, coldly exclude a considerable portion of humanity from
enjoying it; that has been seen more than once.

"What, these waggons may coldly exclude?" repeated someone.

"That has been seen already," continued Lebedeff, not deigning to
notice the interruption. "Malthus was a friend of humanity, but, with
ill-founded moral principles, the friend of humanity is the devourer of
humanity, without mentioning his pride; for, touch the vanity of one of
these numberless philanthropists, and to avenge his self-esteem, he will
be ready at once to set fire to the whole globe; and to tell the truth,
we are all more or less like that. I, perhaps, might be the first to set
a light to the fuel, and then run away. But, again, I must repeat, that
is not the question."

"What is it then, for goodness' sake?"

"He is boring us!"

"The question is connected with the following anecdote of past times;
for I am obliged to relate a story. In our times, and in our country,
which I hope you love as much as I do, for as far as I am concerned, I
am ready to shed the last drop of my blood...

"Go on! Go on!"

"In our dear country, as indeed in the whole of Europe, a famine visits
humanity about four times a century, as far as I can remember; once in
every twenty-five years. I won't swear to this being the exact figure,
but anyhow they have become comparatively rare."

"Comparatively to what?"

"To the twelfth century, and those immediately preceding and following
it. We are told by historians that widespread famines occurred in those
days every two or three years, and such was the condition of things that
men actually had recourse to cannibalism, in secret, of course. One of
these cannibals, who had reached a good age, declared of his own free
will that during the course of his long and miserable life he had
personally killed and eaten, in the most profound secrecy, sixty monks,
not to mention several children; the number of the latter he thought was
about six, an insignificant total when compared with the enormous mass
of ecclesiastics consumed by him. As to adults, laymen that is to say,
he had never touched them."

The president joined in the general outcry.

"That's impossible!" said he in an aggrieved tone. "I am often
discussing subjects of this nature with him, gentlemen, but for the
most part he talks nonsense enough to make one deaf: this story has no
pretence of being true."

"General, remember the siege of Kars! And you, gentlemen, I assure you
my anecdote is the naked truth. I may remark that reality, although it
is governed by invariable law, has at times a resemblance to falsehood.
In fact, the truer a thing is the less true it sounds."

"But could anyone possibly eat sixty monks?" objected the scoffing
listeners.

"It is quite clear that he did not eat them all at once, but in a
space of fifteen or twenty years: from that point of view the thing is
comprehensible and natural..."

"Natural?"

"And natural," repeated Lebedeff with pedantic obstinacy. "Besides, a
Catholic monk is by nature excessively curious; it would be quite easy
therefore to entice him into a wood, or some secret place, on false
pretences, and there to deal with him as said. But I do not dispute in
the least that the number of persons consumed appears to denote a spice
of greediness."

"It is perhaps true, gentlemen," said the prince, quietly. He had
been listening in silence up to that moment without taking part in the
conversation, but laughing heartily with the others from time to time.
Evidently he was delighted to see that everybody was amused, that
everybody was talking at once, and even that everybody was drinking.
It seemed as if he were not intending to speak at all, when suddenly
he intervened in such a serious voice that everyone looked at him with
interest.

"It is true that there were frequent famines at that time, gentlemen.
I have often heard of them, though I do not know much history. But it
seems to me that it must have been so. When I was in Switzerland I used
to look with astonishment at the many ruins of feudal castles perched
on the top of steep and rocky heights, half a mile at least above
sea-level, so that to reach them one had to climb many miles of stony
tracks. A castle, as you know, is, a kind of mountain of stones--a
dreadful, almost an impossible, labour! Doubtless the builders were
all poor men, vassals, and had to pay heavy taxes, and to keep up the
priesthood. How, then, could they provide for themselves, and when
had they time to plough and sow their fields? The greater number must,
literally, have died of starvation. I have sometimes asked myself how
it was that these communities were not utterly swept off the face of the
earth, and how they could possibly survive. Lebedeff is not mistaken,
in my opinion, when he says that there were cannibals in those days,
perhaps in considerable numbers; but I do not understand why he should
have dragged in the monks, nor what he means by that."

"It is undoubtedly because, in the twelfth century, monks were the only
people one could eat; they were the fat, among many lean," said Gavrila
Ardalionovitch.

"A brilliant idea, and most true!" cried Lebedeff, "for he never
even touched the laity. Sixty monks, and not a single layman! It is a
terrible idea, but it is historic, it is statistic; it is indeed one of
those facts which enables an intelligent historian to reconstruct the
physiognomy of a special epoch, for it brings out this further point
with mathematical accuracy, that the clergy were in those days sixty
times richer and more flourishing than the rest of humanity and perhaps
sixty times fatter also..."

"You are exaggerating, you are exaggerating, Lebedeff!" cried his
hearers, amid laughter.

"I admit that it is an historic thought, but what is your conclusion?"
asked the prince.

He spoke so seriously in addressing Lebedeff, that his tone contrasted
quite comically with that of the others. They were very nearly laughing
at him, too, but he did not notice it.

"Don't you see he is a lunatic, prince?" whispered Evgenie Pavlovitch
in his ear. "Someone told me just now that he is a bit touched on the
subject of lawyers, that he has a mania for making speeches and intends
to pass the examinations. I am expecting a splendid burlesque now."

"My conclusion is vast," replied Lebedeff, in a voice like thunder. "Let
us examine first the psychological and legal position of the criminal.
We see that in spite of the difficulty of finding other food, the
accused, or, as we may say, my client, has often during his peculiar
life exhibited signs of repentance, and of wishing to give up this
clerical diet. Incontrovertible facts prove this assertion. He has eaten
five or six children, a relatively insignificant number, no doubt,
but remarkable enough from another point of view. It is manifest that,
pricked by remorse--for my client is religious, in his way, and has a
conscience, as I shall prove later--and desiring to extenuate his sin
as far as possible, he has tried six times at least to substitute lay
nourishment for clerical. That this was merely an experiment we can
hardly doubt: for if it had been only a question of gastronomic variety,
six would have been too few; why only six? Why not thirty? But if we
regard it as an experiment, inspired by the fear of committing new
sacrilege, then this number six becomes intelligible. Six attempts
to calm his remorse, and the pricking of his conscience, would amply
suffice, for these attempts could scarcely have been happy ones. In
my humble opinion, a child is too small; I should say, not sufficient;
which would result in four or five times more lay children than monks
being required in a given time. The sin, lessened on the one hand, would
therefore be increased on the other, in quantity, not in quality. Please
understand, gentlemen, that in reasoning thus, I am taking the point of
view which might have been taken by a criminal of the middle ages. As
for myself, a man of the late nineteenth century, I, of course, should
reason differently; I say so plainly, and therefore you need not jeer
at me nor mock me, gentlemen. As for you, general, it is still more
unbecoming on your part. In the second place, and giving my own personal
opinion, a child's flesh is not a satisfying diet; it is too insipid,
too sweet; and the criminal, in making these experiments, could have
satisfied neither his conscience nor his appetite. I am about to
conclude, gentlemen; and my conclusion contains a reply to one of the
most important questions of that day and of our own! This criminal ended
at last by denouncing himself to the clergy, and giving himself up to
justice. We cannot but ask, remembering the penal system of that day,
and the tortures that awaited him--the wheel, the stake, the fire!--we
cannot but ask, I repeat, what induced him to accuse himself of this
crime? Why did he not simply stop short at the number sixty, and keep
his secret until his last breath? Why could he not simply leave the
monks alone, and go into the desert to repent? Or why not become a
monk himself? That is where the puzzle comes in! There must have been
something stronger than the stake or the fire, or even than the habits
of twenty years! There must have been an idea more powerful than all
the calamities and sorrows of this world, famine or torture, leprosy or
plague--an idea which entered into the heart, directed and enlarged the
springs of life, and made even that hell supportable to humanity!
Show me a force, a power like that, in this our century of vices
and railways! I might say, perhaps, in our century of steamboats and
railways, but I repeat in our century of vices and railways, because I
am drunk but truthful! Show me a single idea which unites men nowadays
with half the strength that it had in those centuries, and dare to
maintain that the 'springs of life' have not been polluted and weakened
beneath this 'star,' beneath this network in which men are entangled!
Don't talk to me about your prosperity, your riches, the rarity of
famine, the rapidity of the means of transport! There is more of riches,
but less of force. The idea uniting heart and soul to heart and soul
exists no more. All is loose, soft, limp--we are all of us limp....
Enough, gentlemen! I have done. That is not the question. No, the
question is now, excellency, I believe, to sit down to the banquet you
are about to provide for us!"

Lebedeff had roused great indignation in some of his auditors (it
should be remarked that the bottles were constantly uncorked during his
speech); but this unexpected conclusion calmed even the most turbulent
spirits. "That's how a clever barrister makes a good point!" said he,
when speaking of his peroration later on. The visitors began to laugh
and chatter once again; the committee left their seats, and stretched
their legs on the terrace. Keller alone was still disgusted with
Lebedeff and his speech; he turned from one to another, saying in a loud
voice:

"He attacks education, he boasts of the fanaticism of the twelfth
century, he makes absurd grimaces, and added to that he is by no means
the innocent he makes himself out to be. How did he get the money to buy
this house, allow me to ask?"

In another corner was the general, holding forth to a group of hearers,
among them Ptitsin, whom he had buttonholed. "I have known," said he,
"a real interpreter of the Apocalypse, the late Gregory Semeonovitch
Burmistroff, and he--he pierced the heart like a fiery flash! He began
by putting on his spectacles, then he opened a large black book;
his white beard, and his two medals on his breast, recalling acts of
charity, all added to his impressiveness. He began in a stern voice, and
before him generals, hard men of the world, bowed down, and ladies
fell to the ground fainting. But this one here--he ends by announcing a
banquet! That is not the real thing!"

Ptitsin listened and smiled, then turned as if to get his hat; but if he
had intended to leave, he changed his mind. Before the others had risen
from the table, Gania had suddenly left off drinking, and pushed away
his glass, a dark shadow seemed to come over his face. When they all
rose, he went and sat down by Rogojin. It might have been believed that
quite friendly relations existed between them. Rogojin, who had also
seemed on the point of going away now sat motionless, his head bent,
seeming to have forgotten his intention. He had drunk no wine, and
appeared absorbed in reflection. From time to time he raised his eyes,
and examined everyone present; one might have imagined that he was
expecting something very important to himself, and that he had decided
to wait for it. The prince had taken two or three glasses of champagne,
and seemed cheerful. As he rose he noticed Evgenie Pavlovitch, and,
remembering the appointment he had made with him, smiled pleasantly.
Evgenie Pavlovitch made a sign with his head towards Hippolyte, whom he
was attentively watching. The invalid was fast asleep, stretched out on
the sofa.

"Tell me, prince, why on earth did this boy intrude himself upon you?"
he asked, with such annoyance and irritation in his voice that the
prince was quite surprised. "I wouldn't mind laying odds that he is up
to some mischief."

"I have observed," said the prince, "that he seems to be an object of
very singular interest to you, Evgenie Pavlovitch. Why is it?"

"You may add that I have surely enough to think of, on my own account,
without him; and therefore it is all the more surprising that I cannot
tear my eyes and thoughts away from his detestable physiognomy."

"Oh, come! He has a handsome face."

"Why, look at him--look at him now!"

The prince glanced again at Evgenie Pavlovitch with considerable
surprise.

V.

HIPPOLYTE, who had fallen asleep during Lebedeff's discourse, now
suddenly woke up, just as though someone had jogged him in the side. He
shuddered, raised himself on his arm, gazed around, and grew very pale.
A look almost of terror crossed his face as he recollected.

"What! are they all off? Is it all over? Is the sun up?" He trembled,
and caught at the prince's hand. "What time is it? Tell me, quick, for
goodness' sake! How long have I slept?" he added, almost in despair,
just as though he had overslept something upon which his whole fate
depended.

"You have slept seven or perhaps eight minutes," said Evgenie
Pavlovitch.

Hippolyte gazed eagerly at the latter, and mused for a few moments.

"Oh, is that all?" he said at last. "Then I--"

He drew a long, deep breath of relief, as it seemed. He realized that
all was not over as yet, that the sun had not risen, and that the guests
had merely gone to supper. He smiled, and two hectic spots appeared on
his cheeks.

"So you counted the minutes while I slept, did you, Evgenie Pavlovitch?"
he said, ironically. "You have not taken your eyes off me all the
evening--I have noticed that much, you see! Ah, Rogojin! I've just
been dreaming about him, prince," he added, frowning. "Yes, by the by,"
starting up, "where's the orator? Where's Lebedeff? Has he finished?
What did he talk about? Is it true, prince, that you once declared that
'beauty would save the world'? Great Heaven! The prince says that beauty
saves the world! And I declare that he only has such playful ideas
because he's in love! Gentlemen, the prince is in love. I guessed it the
moment he came in. Don't blush, prince; you make me sorry for you. What
beauty saves the world? Colia told me that you are a zealous Christian;
is it so? Colia says you call yourself a Christian."

The prince regarded him attentively, but said nothing.

"You don't answer me; perhaps you think I am very fond of you?" added
Hippolyte, as though the words had been drawn from him.

"No, I don't think that. I know you don't love me."

"What, after yesterday? Wasn't I honest with you?"

"I knew yesterday that you didn't love me."

"Why so? why so? Because I envy you, eh? You always think that, I know.
But do you know why I am saying all this? Look here! I must have some
more champagne--pour me out some, Keller, will you?"

"No, you're not to drink any more, Hippolyte. I won't let you." The
prince moved the glass away.

"Well perhaps you're right," said Hippolyte, musing. "They might
say--yet, devil take them! what does it matter?--prince, what can it
matter what people will say of us THEN, eh? I believe I'm half asleep.
I've had such a dreadful dream--I've only just remembered it. Prince, I
don't wish you such dreams as that, though sure enough, perhaps, I DON'T
love you. Why wish a man evil, though you do not love him, eh? Give
me your hand--let me press it sincerely. There--you've given me your
hand--you must feel that I DO press it sincerely, don't you? I don't
think I shall drink any more. What time is it? Never mind, I know the
time. The time has come, at all events. What! they are laying supper
over there, are they? Then this table is free? Capital, gentlemen!
I--hem! these gentlemen are not listening. Prince, I will just read over
an article I have here. Supper is more interesting, of course, but--"

Here Hippolyte suddenly, and most unexpectedly, pulled out of his
breast-pocket a large sealed paper. This imposing-looking document he
placed upon the table before him.

The effect of this sudden action upon the company was instantaneous.
Evgenie Pavlovitch almost bounded off his chair in excitement. Rogojin
drew nearer to the table with a look on his face as if he knew what was
coming. Gania came nearer too; so did Lebedeff and the others--the paper
seemed to be an object of great interest to the company in general.

"What have you got there?" asked the prince, with some anxiety.

"At the first glimpse of the rising sun, prince, I will go to bed. I
told you I would, word of honour! You shall see!" cried Hippolyte.
"You think I'm not capable of opening this packet, do you?" He glared
defiantly round at the audience in general.

The prince observed that he was trembling all over.

"None of us ever thought such a thing!" Muishkin replied for all. "Why
should you suppose it of us? And what are you going to read, Hippolyte?
What is it?"

"Yes, what is it?" asked others. The packet sealed with red wax seemed
to attract everyone, as though it were a magnet.

"I wrote this yesterday, myself, just after I saw you, prince, and told
you I would come down here. I wrote all day and all night, and finished
it this morning early. Afterwards I had a dream."

"Hadn't we better hear it tomorrow?" asked the prince timidly.

"Tomorrow 'there will be no more time!'" laughed Hippolyte,
hysterically. "You needn't be afraid; I shall get through the whole
thing in forty minutes, at most an hour! Look how interested everybody
is! Everybody has drawn near. Look! look at them all staring at my
sealed packet! If I hadn't sealed it up it wouldn't have been half so
effective! Ha, ha! that's mystery, that is! Now then, gentlemen, shall
I break the seal or not? Say the word; it's a mystery, I tell you--a
secret! Prince, you know who said there would be 'no more time'? It was
the great and powerful angel in the Apocalypse."

"Better not read it now," said the prince, putting his hand on the
packet.

"No, don't read it!" cried Evgenie suddenly. He appeared so strangely
disturbed that many of those present could not help wondering.

"Reading? None of your reading now!" said somebody; "it's supper-time."
"What sort of an article is it? For a paper? Probably it's very
dull," said another. But the prince's timid gesture had impressed even
Hippolyte.

"Then I'm not to read it?" he whispered, nervously. "Am I not to read
it?" he repeated, gazing around at each face in turn. "What are you
afraid of, prince?" he turned and asked the latter suddenly.

"What should I be afraid of?"

"Has anyone a coin about them? Give me a twenty-copeck piece, somebody!"
And Hippolyte leapt from his chair.

"Here you are," said Lebedeff, handing him one; he thought the boy had
gone mad.

"Vera Lukianovna," said Hippolyte, "toss it, will you? Heads, I read,
tails, I don't."

