found!"

"Dear me! This is very unpleasant!"

"Unpleasant! Indeed it is. You have found a very appropriate
expression," said Lebedeff, politely, but with sarcasm.

"But what's to be done? It's a serious matter," said the prince,
thoughtfully. "Don't you think you may have dropped it out of your
pocket whilst intoxicated?"

"Certainly. Anything is possible when one is intoxicated, as you neatly
express it, prince. But consider--if I, intoxicated or not, dropped an
object out of my pocket on to the ground, that object ought to remain on
the ground. Where is the object, then?"

"Didn't you put it away in some drawer, perhaps?"

"I've looked everywhere, and turned out everything."

"I confess this disturbs me a good deal. Someone must have picked it up,
then."

"Or taken it out of my pocket--two alternatives."

"It is very distressing, because WHO--? That's the question!"

"Most undoubtedly, excellent prince, you have hit it--that is the very
question. How wonderfully you express the exact situation in a few
words!"

"Come, come, Lebedeff, no sarcasm! It's a serious--"

"Sarcasm!" cried Lebedeff, wringing his hands. "All right, all right,
I'm not angry. I'm only put out about this. Whom do you suspect?"

"That is a very difficult and complicated question. I cannot suspect the
servant, for she was in the kitchen the whole evening, nor do I suspect
any of my children."

"I should think not. Go on."

"Then it must be one of the guests."

"Is such a thing possible?"

"Absolutely and utterly impossible--and yet, so it must be. But one
thing I am sure of, if it be a theft, it was committed, not in the
evening when we were all together, but either at night or early in the
morning; therefore, by one of those who slept here. Burdovsky and Colia
I except, of course. They did not even come into my room."

"Yes, or even if they had! But who did sleep with you?"

"Four of us, including myself, in two rooms. The general, myself,
Keller, and Ferdishenko. One of us four it must have been. I don't
suspect myself, though such cases have been known."

"Oh! _do_ go on, Lebedeff! Don't drag it out so."

"Well, there are three left, then--Keller firstly. He is a drunkard
to begin with, and a liberal (in the sense of other people's pockets),
otherwise with more of the ancient knight about him than of the modern
liberal. He was with the sick man at first, but came over afterwards
because there was no place to lie down in the room and the floor was so
hard."

"You suspect him?"

"I DID suspect him. When I woke up at half-past seven and tore my hair
in despair for my loss and carelessness, I awoke the general, who was
sleeping the sleep of innocence near me. Taking into consideration the
sudden disappearance of Ferdishenko, which was suspicious in itself, we
decided to search Keller, who was lying there sleeping like a top. Well,
we searched his clothes thoroughly, and not a farthing did we find; in
fact, his pockets all had holes in them. We found a dirty handkerchief,
and a love-letter from some scullery-maid. The general decided that he
was innocent. We awoke him for further inquiries, and had the greatest
difficulty in making him understand what was up. He opened his mouth and
stared--he looked so stupid and so absurdly innocent. It wasn't Keller."

"Oh, I'm so glad!" said the prince, joyfully. "I was so afraid."

"Afraid! Then you had some grounds for supposing he might be the
culprit?" said Lebedeff, frowning.

"Oh no--not a bit! It was foolish of me to say I was afraid! Don't
repeat it please, Lebedeff, don't tell anyone I said that!"

"My dear prince! your words lie in the lowest depth of my heart--it is
their tomb!" said Lebedeff, solemnly, pressing his hat to the region of
his heart.

"Thanks; very well. Then I suppose it's Ferdishenko; that is, I mean,
you suspect Ferdishenko?"

"Whom else?" said Lebedeff, softly, gazing intently into the prince s
face.

"Of course--quite so, whom else? But what are the proofs?"

"We have evidence. In the first place, his mysterious disappearance at
seven o'clock, or even earlier."

"I know, Colia told me that he had said he was off to--I forget the
name, some friend of his, to finish the night."

"H'm! then Colia has spoken to you already?"

"Not about the theft."

"He does not know of it; I have kept it a secret. Very well, Ferdishenko
went off to Wilkin's. That is not so curious in itself, but here the
evidence opens out further. He left his address, you see, when he went.
Now prince, consider, why did he leave his address? Why do you suppose
he went out of his way to tell Colia that he had gone to Wilkin's? Who
cared to know that he was going to Wilkin's? No, no! prince, this is
finesse, thieves' finesse! This is as good as saying, 'There, how can I
be a thief when I leave my address? I'm not concealing my movements as a
thief would.' Do you understand, prince?"

"Oh yes, but that is not enough."

"Second proof. The scent turns out to be false, and the address given
is a sham. An hour after--that is at about eight, I went to Wilkin's
myself, and there was no trace of Ferdishenko. The maid did tell me,
certainly, that an hour or so since someone had been hammering at the
door, and had smashed the bell; she said she would not open the door
because she didn't want to wake her master; probably she was too lazy to
get up herself. Such phenomena are met with occasionally!"

"But is that all your evidence? It is not enough!"

"Well, prince, whom are we to suspect, then? Consider!" said Lebedeff
with almost servile amiability, smiling at the prince. There was a look
of cunning in his eyes, however.

"You should search your room and all the cupboards again," said the
prince, after a moment or two of silent reflection.

"But I have done so, my dear prince!" said Lebedeff, more sweetly than
ever.

"H'm! why must you needs go up and change your coat like that?" asked
the prince, banging the table with his fist, in annoyance.

"Oh, don't be so worried on my account, prince! I assure you I am not
worth it! At least, not I alone. But I see you are suffering on behalf
of the criminal too, for wretched Ferdishenko, in fact!"

"Of course you have given me a disagreeable enough thing to think
about," said the prince, irritably, "but what are you going to do, since
you are so sure it was Ferdishenko?"

"But who else COULD it be, my very dear prince?" repeated Lebedeff, as
sweet as sugar again. "If you don't wish me to suspect Mr. Burdovsky?"

"Of course not."

"Nor the general? Ha, ha, ha!"

"Nonsense!" said the prince, angrily, turning round upon him.

"Quite so, nonsense! Ha, ha, ha! dear me! He did amuse me, did the
general! We went off on the hot scent to Wilkin's together, you know;
but I must first observe that the general was even more thunderstruck
than I myself this morning, when I awoke him after discovering the
theft; so much so that his very face changed--he grew red and then pale,
and at length flew into a paroxysm of such noble wrath that I assure you
I was quite surprised! He is a most generous-hearted man! He tells lies
by the thousands, I know, but it is merely a weakness; he is a man of
the highest feelings; a simple-minded man too, and a man who carries the
conviction of innocence in his very appearance. I love that man, sir; I
may have told you so before; it is a weakness of mine. Well--he suddenly
stopped in the middle of the road, opened out his coat and bared his
breast. 'Search me,' he says, 'you searched Keller; why don't you search
me too? It is only fair!' says he." And all the while his legs and hands
were trembling with anger, and he as white as a sheet all over! So I
said to him, "Nonsense, general; if anybody but yourself had said that
to me, I'd have taken my head, my own head, and put it on a large dish
and carried it round to anyone who suspected you; and I should have
said: 'There, you see that head? It's my head, and I'll go bail with
that head for him! Yes, and walk through the fire for him, too. There,'
says I, 'that's how I'd answer for you, general!' Then he embraced me,
in the middle of the street, and hugged me so tight (crying over me all
the while) that I coughed fit to choke! 'You are the one friend left to
me amid all my misfortunes,' says he. Oh, he's a man of sentiment, that!
He went on to tell me a story of how he had been accused, or suspected,
of stealing five hundred thousand roubles once, as a young man; and how,
the very next day, he had rushed into a burning, blazing house and saved
the very count who suspected him, and Nina Alexandrovna (who was then
a young girl), from a fiery death. The count embraced him, and that was
how he came to marry Nina Alexandrovna, he said. As for the money, it
was found among the ruins next day in an English iron box with a secret
lock; it had got under the floor somehow, and if it had not been for the
fire it would never have been found! The whole thing is, of course, an
absolute fabrication, though when he spoke of Nina Alexandrovna he wept!
She's a grand woman, is Nina Alexandrovna, though she is very angry with
me!"

"Are you acquainted with her?"

"Well, hardly at all. I wish I were, if only for the sake of justifying
myself in her eyes. Nina Alexandrovna has a grudge against me for, as
she thinks, encouraging her husband in drinking; whereas in reality I
not only do not encourage him, but I actually keep him out of harm's
way, and out of bad company. Besides, he's my friend, prince, so that
I shall not lose sight of him, again. Where he goes, I go. He's quite
given up visiting the captain's widow, though sometimes he thinks sadly
of her, especially in the morning, when he's putting on his boots. I
don't know why it's at that time. But he has no money, and it's no
use his going to see her without. Has he borrowed any money from you,
prince?"

"No, he has not."

"Ah, he's ashamed to! He MEANT to ask you, I know, for he said so. I
suppose he thinks that as you gave him some once (you remember), you
would probably refuse if he asked you again."

"Do you ever give him money?"

"Prince! Money! Why I would give that man not only my money, but my
very life, if he wanted it. Well, perhaps that's exaggeration; not life,
we'll say, but some illness, a boil or a bad cough, or anything of that
sort, I would stand with pleasure, for his sake; for I consider him a
great man fallen--money, indeed!"

"H'm, then you DO give him money?"

"N-no, I have never given him money, and he knows well that I will never
give him any; because I am anxious to keep him out of intemperate
ways. He is going to town with me now; for you must know I am off to
Petersburg after Ferdishenko, while the scent is hot; I'm certain he is
there. I shall let the general go one way, while I go the other; we have
so arranged matters in order to pop out upon Ferdishenko, you see, from
different sides. But I am going to follow that naughty old general and
catch him, I know where, at a certain widow's house; for I think it will
be a good lesson, to put him to shame by catching him with the widow."

"Oh, Lebedeff, don't, don't make any scandal about it!" said the prince,
much agitated, and speaking in a low voice.

"Not for the world, not for the world! I merely wish to make him ashamed
of himself. Oh, prince, great though this misfortune be to myself, I
cannot help thinking of his morals! I have a great favour to ask of you,
esteemed prince; I confess that it is the chief object of my visit. You
know the Ivolgins, you have even lived in their house; so if you would
lend me your help, honoured prince, in the general's own interest and
for his good."

Lebedeff clasped his hands in supplication.

"What help do you want from me? You may be certain that I am most
anxious to understand you, Lebedeff."

"I felt sure of that, or I should not have come to you. We might manage
it with the help of Nina Alexandrovna, so that he might be closely
watched in his own house. Unfortunately I am not on terms...
otherwise... but Nicolai Ardalionovitch, who adores you with all his
youthful soul, might help, too."

"No, no! Heaven forbid that we should bring Nina Alexandrovna into this
business! Or Colia, either. But perhaps I have not yet quite understood
you, Lebedeff?"

Lebedeff made an impatient movement.

"But there is nothing to understand! Sympathy and tenderness, that
is all--that is all our poor invalid requires! You will permit me to
consider him an invalid?"

"Yes, it shows delicacy and intelligence on your part."

"I will explain my idea by a practical example, to make it clearer. You
know the sort of man he is. At present his only failing is that he is
crazy about that captain's widow, and he cannot go to her without
money, and I mean to catch him at her house today--for his own good; but
supposing it was not only the widow, but that he had committed a real
crime, or at least some very dishonourable action (of which he is, of
course, incapable), I repeat that even in that case, if he were treated
with what I may call generous tenderness, one could get at the whole
truth, for he is very soft-hearted! Believe me, he would betray himself
before five days were out; he would burst into tears, and make a clean
breast of the matter; especially if managed with tact, and if you and
his family watched his every step, so to speak. Oh, my dear prince,"
Lebedeff added most emphatically, "I do not positively assert that he
has... I am ready, as the saying is, to shed my last drop of blood for
him this instant; but you will admit that debauchery, drunkenness, and
the captain's widow, all these together may lead him very far."

"I am, of course, quite ready to add my efforts to yours in such a
case," said the prince, rising; "but I confess, Lebedeff, that I am
terribly perplexed. Tell me, do you still think... plainly, you say
yourself that you suspect Mr. Ferdishenko?"

Lebedeff clasped his hands once more.

"Why, who else could I possibly suspect? Who else, most outspoken
prince?" he replied, with an unctuous smile.

Muishkin frowned, and rose from his seat.

"You see, Lebedeff, a mistake here would be a dreadful thing. This
Ferdishenko, I would not say a word against him, of course; but, who
knows? Perhaps it really was he? I mean he really does seem to be a more
likely man than... than any other."

Lebedeff strained his eyes and ears to take in what the prince was
saying. The latter was frowning more and more, and walking excitedly up
and down, trying not to look at Lebedeff.

"You see," he said, "I was given to understand that Ferdishenko was that
sort of man,--that one can't say everything before him. One has to take
care not to say too much, you understand? I say this to prove that he
really is, so to speak, more likely to have done this than anyone else,
eh? You understand? The important thing is, not to make a mistake."

"And who told you this about Ferdishenko?"

"Oh, I was told. Of course I don't altogether believe it. I am very
sorry that I should have had to say this, because I assure you I don't
believe it myself; it is all nonsense, of course. It was stupid of me to
say anything about it."

"You see, it is very important, it is most important to know where you
got this report from," said Lebedeff, excitedly. He had risen from his
seat, and was trying to keep step with the prince, running after him, up
and down. "Because look here, prince, I don't mind telling you now that
as we were going along to Wilkin's this morning, after telling me what
you know about the fire, and saving the count and all that, the general
was pleased to drop certain hints to the same effect about Ferdishenko,
but so vaguely and clumsily that I thought better to put a few questions
to him on the matter, with the result that I found the whole thing was
an invention of his excellency's own mind. Of course, he only lies with
the best intentions; still, he lies. But, such being the case, where
could you have heard the same report? It was the inspiration of the
moment with him, you understand, so who could have told YOU? It is an
important question, you see!"

"It was Colia told me, and his father told HIM at about six this
morning. They met at the threshold, when Colia was leaving the room for
something or other." The prince told Lebedeff all that Colia had made
known to himself, in detail.

"There now, that's what we may call SCENT!" said Lebedeff, rubbing his
hands and laughing silently. "I thought it must be so, you see. The
general interrupted his innocent slumbers, at six o'clock, in order
to go and wake his beloved son, and warn him of the dreadful danger of
companionship with Ferdishenko. Dear me! what a dreadfully dangerous man
Ferdishenko must be, and what touching paternal solicitude, on the part
of his excellency, ha! ha! ha!"

"Listen, Lebedeff," began the prince, quite overwhelmed; "DO act
quietly--don't make a scandal, Lebedeff, I ask you--I entreat you! No
one must know--NO ONE, mind! In that case only, I will help you."

"Be assured, most honourable, most worthy of princes--be assured that
the whole matter shall be buried within my heart!" cried Lebedeff, in a
paroxysm of exaltation. "I'd give every drop of my blood... Illustrious
prince, I am a poor wretch in soul and spirit, but ask the veriest
scoundrel whether he would prefer to deal with one like himself, or with
a noble-hearted man like you, and there is no doubt as to his choice!
He'll answer that he prefers the noble-hearted man--and there you
have the triumph of virtue! Au revoir, honoured prince! You and I
together--softly! softly!"

X.

THE prince understood at last why he shivered with dread every time
he thought of the three letters in his pocket, and why he had put off
reading them until the evening.

When he fell into a heavy sleep on the sofa on the verandah, without
having had the courage to open a single one of the three envelopes, he
again dreamed a painful dream, and once more that poor, "sinful" woman
appeared to him. Again she gazed at him with tears sparkling on her long
lashes, and beckoned him after her; and again he awoke, as before, with
the picture of her face haunting him.

He longed to get up and go to her at once--but he COULD NOT. At length,
almost in despair, he unfolded the letters, and began to read them.

These letters, too, were like a dream. We sometimes have strange,
impossible dreams, contrary to all the laws of nature. When we awake we
remember them and wonder at their strangeness. You remember, perhaps,
that you were in full possession of your reason during this succession
of fantastic images; even that you acted with extraordinary logic and
cunning while surrounded by murderers who hid their intentions and made
great demonstrations of friendship, while waiting for an opportunity
to cut your throat. You remember how you escaped them by some ingenious
stratagem; then you doubted if they were really deceived, or whether
they were only pretending not to know your hiding-place; then you
thought of another plan and hoodwinked them once again. You remember all
this quite clearly, but how is it that your reason calmly accepted all
the manifest absurdities and impossibilities that crowded into your
dream? One of the murderers suddenly changed into a woman before your
very eyes; then the woman was transformed into a hideous, cunning little
dwarf; and you believed it, and accepted it all almost as a matter of
course--while at the same time your intelligence seemed unusually keen,
and accomplished miracles of cunning, sagacity, and logic! Why is it
that when you awake to the world of realities you nearly always feel,
sometimes very vividly, that the vanished dream has carried with it some
enigma which you have failed to solve? You smile at the extravagance
of your dream, and yet you feel that this tissue of absurdity contained
some real idea, something that belongs to your true life,--something
that exists, and has always existed, in your heart. You search your
dream for some prophecy that you were expecting. It has left a deep
impression upon you, joyful or cruel, but what it means, or what has
been predicted to you in it, you can neither understand nor remember.

The reading of these letters produced some such effect upon the prince.
He felt, before he even opened the envelopes, that the very fact of
their existence was like a nightmare. How could she ever have made up
her mind to write to her? he asked himself. How could she write about
that at all? And how could such a wild idea have entered her head?
And yet, the strangest part of the matter was, that while he read the
letters, he himself almost believed in the possibility, and even in the
justification, of the idea he had thought so wild. Of course it was a
mad dream, a nightmare, and yet there was something cruelly real about
it. For hours he was haunted by what he had read. Several passages
returned again and again to his mind, and as he brooded over them, he
felt inclined to say to himself that he had foreseen and known all that
was written here; it even seemed to him that he had read the whole of
this some time or other, long, long ago; and all that had tormented and
grieved him up to now was to be found in these old, long since read,
letters.

"When you open this letter" (so the first began), "look first at the
signature. The signature will tell you all, so that I need explain
nothing, nor attempt to justify myself. Were I in any way on a footing
with you, you might be offended at my audacity; but who am I, and who
are you? We are at such extremes, and I am so far removed from you, that
I could not offend you if I wished to do so."

Farther on, in another place, she wrote: "Do not consider my words
as the sickly ecstasies of a diseased mind, but you are, in my
opinion--perfection! I have seen you--I see you every day. I do not
judge you; I have not weighed you in the scales of Reason and found you
Perfection--it is simply an article of faith. But I must confess one sin
against you--I love you. One should not love perfection. One should
only look on it as perfection--yet I am in love with you. Though love
equalizes, do not fear. I have not lowered you to my level, even in
my most secret thoughts. I have written 'Do not fear,' as if you could
fear. I would kiss your footprints if I could; but, oh! I am not putting
myself on a level with you!--Look at the signature--quick, look at the
signature!"

"However, observe" (she wrote in another of the letters), "that although
I couple you with him, yet I have not once asked you whether you love
him. He fell in love with you, though he saw you but once. He spoke of
you as of 'the light.' These are his own words--I heard him use them.
But I understood without his saying it that you were all that light is
to him. I lived near him for a whole month, and I understood then that
you, too, must love him. I think of you and him as one."

"What was the matter yesterday?" (she wrote on another sheet). "I passed
by you, and you seemed to me to BLUSH. Perhaps it was only my fancy.
If I were to bring you to the most loathsome den, and show you the
revelation of undisguised vice--you should not blush. You can never feel
the sense of personal affront. You may hate all who are mean, or base,
or unworthy--but not for yourself--only for those whom they wrong. No
one can wrong YOU. Do you know, I think you ought to love me--for you
are the same in my eyes as in his-you are as light. An angel cannot
hate, perhaps cannot love, either. I often ask myself--is it possible to
love everybody? Indeed it is not; it is not in nature. Abstract love
of humanity is nearly always love of self. But you are different. You
cannot help loving all, since you can compare with none, and are above
all personal offence or anger. Oh! how bitter it would be to me to
know that you felt anger or shame on my account, for that would be your
fall--you would become comparable at once with such as me.

"Yesterday, after seeing you, I went home and thought out a picture.

"Artists always draw the Saviour as an actor in one of the Gospel
stories. I should do differently. I should represent Christ alone--the
disciples did leave Him alone occasionally. I should paint one little
child left with Him. This child has been playing about near Him, and
had probably just been telling the Saviour something in its pretty
baby prattle. Christ had listened to it, but was now musing--one
hand reposing on the child's bright head. His eyes have a far-away
expression. Thought, great as the Universe, is in them--His face is sad.
The little one leans its elbow upon Christ's knee, and with its cheek
resting on its hand, gazes up at Him, pondering as children sometimes do
ponder. The sun is setting. There you have my picture.

"You are innocent--and in your innocence lies all your perfection--oh,
remember that! What is my passion to you?--you are mine now; I shall be
near you all my life--I shall not live long!"

At length, in the last letter of all, he found:

"For Heaven's sake, don't misunderstand me! Do not think that I
humiliate myself by writing thus to you, or that I belong to that class
of people who take a satisfaction in humiliating themselves--from pride.
I have my consolation, though it would be difficult to explain it--but I
do not humiliate myself.

"Why do I wish to unite you two? For your sakes or my own? For my own
sake, naturally. All the problems of my life would thus be solved;
I have thought so for a long time. I know that once when your sister
Adelaida saw my portrait she said that such beauty could overthrow
the world. But I have renounced the world. You think it strange that
I should say so, for you saw me decked with lace and diamonds, in the
company of drunkards and wastrels. Take no notice of that; I know that
I have almost ceased to exist. God knows what it is dwelling within me
now--it is not myself. I can see it every day in two dreadful eyes which
are always looking at me, even when not present. These eyes are silent
now, they say nothing; but I know their secret. His house is gloomy, and
there is a secret in it. I am convinced that in some box he has a razor
hidden, tied round with silk, just like the one that Moscow murderer
had. This man also lived with his mother, and had a razor hidden away,
tied round with white silk, and with this razor he intended to cut a
throat.

"All the while I was in their house I felt sure that somewhere beneath
the floor there was hidden away some dreadful corpse, wrapped in
oil-cloth, perhaps buried there by his father, who knows? Just as in the
Moscow case. I could have shown you the very spot!

"He is always silent, but I know well that he loves me so much that he
must hate me. My wedding and yours are to be on the same day; so I have
arranged with him. I have no secrets from him. I would kill him from
very fright, but he will kill me first. He has just burst out laughing,
and says that I am raving. He knows I am writing to you."

There was much more of this delirious wandering in the letters--one of
them was very long.

At last the prince came out of the dark, gloomy park, in which he had
wandered about for hours just as yesterday. The bright night seemed to
him to be lighter than ever. "It must be quite early," he thought. (He
had forgotten his watch.) There was a sound of distant music somewhere.
"Ah," he thought, "the Vauxhall! They won't be there today, of course!"
At this moment he noticed that he was close to their house; he had felt
that he must gravitate to this spot eventually, and, with a beating
heart, he mounted the verandah steps.

No one met him; the verandah was empty, and nearly pitch dark. He opened
the door into the room, but it, too, was dark and empty. He stood in the
middle of the room in perplexity. Suddenly the door opened, and in came
Alexandra, candle in hand. Seeing the prince she stopped before him in
surprise, looking at him questioningly.

It was clear that she had been merely passing through the room from door
to door, and had not had the remotest notion that she would meet anyone.

"How did you come here?" she asked, at last.

"I-I--came in--"

"Mamma is not very well, nor is Aglaya. Adelaida has gone to bed, and
I am just going. We were alone the whole evening. Father and Prince S.
have gone to town."

"I have come to you--now--to--"

"Do you know what time it is?"

"N--no!"

"Half-past twelve. We are always in bed by one."

"I-I thought it was half-past nine!"

"Never mind!" she laughed, "but why didn't you come earlier? Perhaps you
were expected!"

"I thought" he stammered, making for the door.

"Au revoir! I shall amuse them all with this story tomorrow!"

He walked along the road towards his own house. His heart was beating,
his thoughts were confused, everything around seemed to be part of a
dream.

And suddenly, just as twice already he had awaked from sleep with the
same vision, that very apparition now seemed to rise up before him. The
woman appeared to step out from the park, and stand in the path in front
of him, as though she had been waiting for him there.

He shuddered and stopped; she seized his hand and pressed it frenziedly.

No, this was no apparition!

There she stood at last, face to face with him, for the first time since
their parting.

She said something, but he looked silently back at her. His heart ached
with anguish. Oh! never would he banish the recollection of this meeting
with her, and he never remembered it but with the same pain and agony of
mind.

She went on her knees before him--there in the open road--like a
madwoman. He retreated a step, but she caught his hand and kissed
it, and, just as in his dream, the tears were sparkling on her long,
beautiful lashes.

"Get up!" he said, in a frightened whisper, raising her. "Get up at
once!"

"Are you happy--are you happy?" she asked. "Say this one word. Are you
happy now? Today, this moment? Have you just been with her? What did she
say?"

She did not rise from her knees; she would not listen to him; she put
her questions hurriedly, as though she were pursued.

"I am going away tomorrow, as you bade me--I won't write--so that this
is the last time I shall see you, the last time! This is really the LAST
TIME!"

"Oh, be calm--be calm! Get up!" he entreated, in despair.

She gazed thirstily at him and clutched his hands.

"Good-bye!" she said at last, and rose and left him, very quickly.

The prince noticed that Rogojin had suddenly appeared at her side, and
had taken her arm and was leading her away.

"Wait a minute, prince," shouted the latter, as he went. "I shall be
back in five minutes."

He reappeared in five minutes as he had said. The prince was waiting for
him.

"I've put her in the carriage," he said; "it has been waiting round the
corner there since ten o'clock. She expected that you would be with THEM
all the evening. I told her exactly what you wrote me. She won't write
to the girl any more, she promises; and tomorrow she will be off, as you
wish. She desired to see you for the last time, although you refused,
so we've been sitting and waiting on that bench till you should pass on
your way home."

"Did she bring you with her of her own accord?"

"Of course she did!" said Rogojin, showing his teeth; "and I saw for
myself what I knew before. You've read her letters, I suppose?"

"Did you read them?" asked the prince, struck by the thought.

"Of course--she showed them to me herself. You are thinking of the
razor, eh? Ha, ha, ha!"

"Oh, she is mad!" cried the prince, wringing his hands. "Who knows?
Perhaps she is not so mad after all," said Rogojin, softly, as though
thinking aloud.

The prince made no reply.

"Well, good-bye," said Rogojin. "I'm off tomorrow too, you know.
Remember me kindly! By-the-by," he added, turning round sharply again,
"did you answer her question just now? Are you happy, or not?"

"No, no, no!" cried the prince, with unspeakable sadness.

"Ha, ha! I never supposed you would say 'yes,'" cried Rogojin, laughing
sardonically.

And he disappeared, without looking round again.




PART IV

I.

A WEEK had elapsed since the rendezvous of our two friends on the
green bench in the park, when, one fine morning at about half-past ten
o'clock, Varvara Ardalionovna, otherwise Mrs. Ptitsin, who had been
out to visit a friend, returned home in a state of considerable mental
depression.

There are certain people of whom it is difficult to say anything which
will at once throw them into relief--in other words, describe them
graphically in their typical characteristics. These are they who are
generally known as "commonplace people," and this class comprises, of
course, the immense majority of mankind. Authors, as a rule, attempt to
select and portray types rarely met with in their entirety, but these
types are nevertheless more real than real life itself.

"Podkoleosin" [A character in Gogol's comedy, The Wedding.] was perhaps
an exaggeration, but he was by no means a non-existent character; on the
contrary, how many intelligent people, after hearing of this Podkoleosin
from Gogol, immediately began to find that scores of their friends were
exactly like him! They knew, perhaps, before Gogol told them, that their
friends were like Podkoleosin, but they did not know what name to give
them. In real life, young fellows seldom jump out of the window just
before their weddings, because such a feat, not to speak of its other
aspects, must be a decidedly unpleasant mode of escape; and yet there
are plenty of bridegrooms, intelligent fellows too, who would be ready
to confess themselves Podkoleosins in the depths of their consciousness,
just before marriage. Nor does every husband feel bound to repeat
at every step, "Tu l'as voulu, Georges Dandin!" like another typical
personage; and yet how many millions and billions of Georges Dandins
there are in real life who feel inclined to utter this soul-drawn cry
after their honeymoon, if not the day after the wedding! Therefore,
without entering into any more serious examination of the question, I
will content myself with remarking that in real life typical characters
are "watered down," so to speak; and all these Dandins and Podkoleosins
actually exist among us every day, but in a diluted form. I will just
add, however, that Georges Dandin might have existed exactly as Moliere
presented him, and probably does exist now and then, though rarely; and
so I will end this scientific examination, which is beginning to
look like a newspaper criticism. But for all this, the question
remains,--what are the novelists to do with commonplace people, and how
are they to be presented to the reader in such a form as to be in
the least degree interesting? They cannot be left out altogether, for
commonplace people meet one at every turn of life, and to leave them out
would be to destroy the whole reality and probability of the story. To
fill a novel with typical characters only, or with merely strange and
uncommon people, would render the book unreal and improbable, and
would very likely destroy the interest. In my opinion, the duty of the
novelist is to seek out points of interest and instruction even in the
characters of commonplace people.

For instance, when the whole essence of an ordinary person's nature lies
in his perpetual and unchangeable commonplaceness; and when in spite of
all his endeavours to do something out of the common, this person ends,
eventually, by remaining in his unbroken line of routine--. I think
such an individual really does become a type of his own--a type of
commonplaceness which will not for the world, if it can help it,
be contented, but strains and yearns to be something original and
independent, without the slightest possibility of being so. To
this class of commonplace people belong several characters in this
novel;--characters which--I admit--I have not drawn very vividly up to
now for my reader's benefit.

Such were, for instance, Varvara Ardalionovna Ptitsin, her husband, and
her brother, Gania.

There is nothing so annoying as to be fairly rich, of a fairly good
family, pleasing presence, average education, to be "not stupid,"
kind-hearted, and yet to have no talent at all, no originality, not a
single idea of one's own--to be, in fact, "just like everyone else."

Of such people there are countless numbers in this world--far more even
than appear. They can be divided into two classes as all men can--that
is, those of limited intellect, and those who are much cleverer. The
former of these classes is the happier.

To a commonplace man of limited intellect, for instance, nothing is
simpler than to imagine himself an original character, and to revel in
that belief without the slightest misgiving.

Many of our young women have thought fit to cut their hair short, put on
blue spectacles, and call themselves Nihilists. By doing this they have
been able to persuade themselves, without further trouble, that they
have acquired new convictions of their own. Some men have but felt some
little qualm of kindness towards their fellow-men, and the fact has
been quite enough to persuade them that they stand alone in the van of
enlightenment and that no one has such humanitarian feelings as they.
Others have but to read an idea of somebody else's, and they can
immediately assimilate it and believe that it was a child of their own
brain. The "impudence of ignorance," if I may use the expression, is
developed to a wonderful extent in such cases;--unlikely as it appears,
it is met with at every turn.

This confidence of a stupid man in his own talents has been wonderfully
depicted by Gogol in the amazing character of Pirogoff. Pirogoff has
not the slightest doubt of his own genius,--nay, of his SUPERIORITY of
genius,--so certain is he of it that he never questions it. How
many Pirogoffs have there not been among our writers--scholars,
propagandists? I say "have been," but indeed there are plenty of them at
this very day.

Our friend, Gania, belonged to the other class--to the "much cleverer"
persons, though he was from head to foot permeated and saturated with
the longing to be original. This class, as I have said above, is far
less happy. For the "clever commonplace" person, though he may possibly
imagine himself a man of genius and originality, none the less has
within his heart the deathless worm of suspicion and doubt; and this
doubt sometimes brings a clever man to despair. (As a rule, however,
nothing tragic happens;--his liver becomes a little damaged in the
course of time, nothing more serious. Such men do not give up their
aspirations after originality without a severe struggle,--and there have
been men who, though good fellows in themselves, and even benefactors
to humanity, have sunk to the level of base criminals for the sake of
originality).

Gania was a beginner, as it were, upon this road. A deep and
unchangeable consciousness of his own lack of talent, combined with a
vast longing to be able to persuade himself that he was original, had
rankled in his heart, even from childhood.

He seemed to have been born with overwrought nerves, and in his
passionate desire to excel, he was often led to the brink of some
rash step; and yet, having resolved upon such a step, when the moment
arrived, he invariably proved too sensible to take it. He was ready,
in the same way, to do a base action in order to obtain his wished-for
object; and yet, when the moment came to do it, he found that he was too
honest for any great baseness. (Not that he objected to acts of petty
meanness--he was always ready for THEM.) He looked with hate and
loathing on the poverty and downfall of his family, and treated his
mother with haughty contempt, although he knew that his whole future
depended on her character and reputation.

Aglaya had simply frightened him; yet he did not give up all thoughts of
her--though he never seriously hoped that she would condescend to him.
At the time of his "adventure" with Nastasia Philipovna he had come to
the conclusion that money was his only hope--money should do all for
him.

At the moment when he lost Aglaya, and after the scene with Nastasia, he
had felt so low in his own eyes that he actually brought the money back
to the prince. Of this returning of the money given to him by a madwoman
who had received it from a madman, he had often repented since--though
he never ceased to be proud of his action. During the short time that
Muishkin remained in Petersburg Gania had had time to come to hate him
for his sympathy, though the prince told him that it was "not everyone
who would have acted so nobly" as to return the money. He had long
pondered, too, over his relations with Aglaya, and had persuaded himself
that with such a strange, childish, innocent character as hers, things
might have ended very differently. Remorse then seized him; he threw up
his post, and buried himself in self-torment and reproach.

He lived at Ptitsin's, and openly showed contempt for the latter, though
he always listened to his advice, and was sensible enough to ask for it
when he wanted it. Gavrila Ardalionovitch was angry with Ptitsin because
the latter did not care to become a Rothschild. "If you are to be a
Jew," he said, "do it properly--squeeze people right and left, show some
character; be the King of the Jews while you are about it."

Ptitsin was quiet and not easily offended--he only laughed. But on one
occasion he explained seriously to Gania that he was no Jew, that he
did nothing dishonest, that he could not help the market price of money,
that, thanks to his accurate habits, he had already a good footing and
was respected, and that his business was flourishing.

"I shan't ever be a Rothschild, and there is no reason why I should," he
added, smiling; "but I shall have a house in the Liteynaya, perhaps two,
and that will be enough for me." "Who knows but what I may have three!"
he concluded to himself; but this dream, cherished inwardly, he never
confided to a soul.

Nature loves and favours such people. Ptitsin will certainly have his
reward, not three houses, but four, precisely because from childhood up
he had realized that he would never be a Rothschild. That will be the
limit of Ptitsin's fortune, and, come what may, he will never have more
than four houses.

Varvara Ardalionovna was not like her brother. She too, had passionate
desires, but they were persistent rather than impetuous. Her plans were
as wise as her methods of carrying them out. No doubt she also belonged
to the category of ordinary people who dream of being original, but she
soon discovered that she had not a grain of true originality, and she
did not let it trouble her too much. Perhaps a certain kind of pride
came to her help. She made her first concession to the demands of
practical life with great resolution when she consented to marry
Ptitsin. However, when she married she did not say to herself, "Never
mind a mean action if it leads to the end in view," as her brother would
certainly have said in such a case; it is quite probable that he may
have said it when he expressed his elder-brotherly satisfaction at her
decision. Far from this; Varvara Ardalionovna did not marry until she
felt convinced that her future husband was unassuming, agreeable,
almost cultured, and that nothing on earth would tempt him to a really
dishonourable deed. As to small meannesses, such trifles did not trouble
her. Indeed, who is free from them? It is absurd to expect the ideal!
Besides, she knew that her marriage would provide a refuge for all her
family. Seeing Gania unhappy, she was anxious to help him, in spite of
their former disputes and misunderstandings. Ptitsin, in a friendly way,
would press his brother-in-law to enter the army. "You know," he said
sometimes, jokingly, "you despise generals and generaldom, but you will
see that 'they' will all end by being generals in their turn. You will
see it if you live long enough!"

"But why should they suppose that I despise generals?" Gania thought
sarcastically to himself.

To serve her brother's interests, Varvara Ardalionovna was constantly at
the Epanchins' house, helped by the fact that in childhood she and Gania
had played with General Ivan Fedorovitch's daughters. It would have been
inconsistent with her character if in these visits she had been pursuing
a chimera; her project was not chimerical at all; she was building on
a firm basis--on her knowledge of the character of the Epanchin family,
especially Aglaya, whom she studied closely. All Varvara's efforts
were directed towards bringing Aglaya and Gania together. Perhaps she
achieved some result; perhaps, also, she made the mistake of depending
too much upon her brother, and expecting more from him than he would
ever be capable of giving. However this may be, her manoeuvres were
skilful enough. For weeks at a time she would never mention Gania. Her
attitude was modest but dignified, and she was always extremely truthful
and sincere. Examining the depths of her conscience, she found nothing
to reproach herself with, and this still further strengthened her in
her designs. But Varvara Ardalionovna sometimes remarked that she felt
spiteful; that there was a good deal of vanity in her, perhaps even of
wounded vanity. She noticed this at certain times more than at others,
and especially after her visits to the Epanchins.

Today, as I have said, she returned from their house with a heavy
feeling of dejection. There was a sensation of bitterness, a sort of
mocking contempt, mingled with it.

Arrived at her own house, Varia heard a considerable commotion going
on in the upper storey, and distinguished the voices of her father and
brother. On entering the salon she found Gania pacing up and down at
frantic speed, pale with rage and almost tearing his hair. She frowned,
and subsided on to the sofa with a tired air, and without taking the
trouble to remove her hat. She very well knew that if she kept quiet and
asked her brother nothing about his reason for tearing up and down the
room, his wrath would fall upon her head. So she hastened to put the
question:

"The old story, eh?"

"Old story? No! Heaven knows what's up now--I don't! Father has simply
gone mad; mother's in floods of tears. Upon my word, Varia, I must kick
him out of the house; or else go myself," he added, probably remembering
that he could not well turn people out of a house which was not his own.

"You must make allowances," murmured Varia.

"Make allowances? For whom? Him--the old blackguard? No, no, Varia--that
won't do! It won't do, I tell you! And look at the swagger of the man!
He's all to blame himself, and yet he puts on so much 'side' that you'd
think--my word!--'It's too much trouble to go through the gate, you must
break the fence for me!' That's the sort of air he puts on; but what's
the matter with you, Varia? What a curious expression you have!"

"I'm all right," said Varia, in a tone that sounded as though she were
all wrong.

Gania looked more intently at her.

"You've been THERE?" he asked, suddenly.

"Yes."

"Did you find out anything?"

"Nothing unexpected. I discovered that it's all true. My husband was
wiser than either of us. Just as he suspected from the beginning, so it
has fallen out. Where is he?"

"Out. Well--what has happened?--go on."

"The prince is formally engaged to her--that's settled. The elder
sisters told me about it. Aglaya has agreed. They don't attempt to
conceal it any longer; you know how mysterious and secret they have all
been up to now. Adelaida's wedding is put off again, so that both can be
married on one day. Isn't that delightfully romantic? Somebody ought to
write a poem on it. Sit down and write an ode instead of tearing up
and down like that. This evening Princess Bielokonski is to arrive; she
comes just in time--they have a party tonight. He is to be presented
to old Bielokonski, though I believe he knows her already; probably the
engagement will be openly announced. They are only afraid that he may
knock something down, or trip over something when he comes into the
room. It would be just like him."

Gania listened attentively, but to his sister's astonishment he was by
no means so impressed by this news (which should, she thought, have been
so important to him) as she had expected.

"Well, it was clear enough all along," he said, after a moment's
reflection. "So that's the end," he added, with a disagreeable smile,
continuing to walk up and down the room, but much slower than before,
and glancing slyly into his sister's face.

"It's a good thing that you take it philosophically, at all events,"
said Varia. "I'm really very glad of it."

"Yes, it's off our hands--off YOURS, I should say."

"I think I have served you faithfully. I never even asked you what
happiness you expected to find with Aglaya."

"Did I ever expect to find happiness with Aglaya?"

"Come, come, don't overdo your philosophy. Of course you did. Now it's
all over, and a good thing, too; pair of fools that we have been! I
confess I have never been able to look at it seriously. I busied myself
in it for your sake, thinking that there was no knowing what might
happen with a funny girl like that to deal with. There were ninety to
one chances against it. To this moment I can't make out why you wished
for it."

"H'm! now, I suppose, you and your husband will never weary of egging
me on to work again. You'll begin your lectures about perseverance and
strength of will, and all that. I know it all by heart," said Gania,
laughing.

"He's got some new idea in his head," thought Varia. "Are they pleased
over there--the parents?" asked Gania, suddenly.

"N--no, I don't think they are. You can judge for yourself. I think the
general is pleased enough; her mother is a little uneasy. She always
loathed the idea of the prince as a HUSBAND; everybody knows that."

"Of course, naturally. The bridegroom is an impossible and ridiculous
one. I mean, has SHE given her formal consent?"

"She has not said 'no,' up to now, and that's all. It was sure to be so
with her. You know what she is like. You know how absurdly shy she is.
You remember how she used to hide in a cupboard as a child, so as to
avoid seeing visitors, for hours at a time. She is just the same now;
but, do you know, I think there is something serious in the matter, even
from her side; I feel it, somehow. She laughs at the prince, they say,
from morn to night in order to hide her real feelings; but you may be
sure she finds occasion to say something or other to him on the sly, for
he himself is in a state of radiant happiness. He walks in the clouds;
they say he is extremely funny just now; I heard it from themselves.
They seemed to be laughing at me in their sleeves--those elder girls--I
don't know why."

Gania had begun to frown, and probably Varia added this last sentence
in order to probe his thought. However, at this moment, the noise began
again upstairs.

"I'll turn him out!" shouted Gania, glad of the opportunity of venting
his vexation. "I shall just turn him out--we can't have this."

"Yes, and then he'll go about the place and disgrace us as he did
yesterday."

"How 'as he did yesterday'? What do you mean? What did he do yesterday?"
asked Gania, in alarm.

"Why, goodness me, don't you know?" Varia stopped short.

"What? You don't mean to say that he went there yesterday!" cried Gania,
flushing red with shame and anger. "Good heavens, Varia! Speak! You have
just been there. WAS he there or not, QUICK?" And Gania rushed for the
door. Varia followed and caught him by both hands.

"What are you doing? Where are you going to? You can't let him go now;
if you do he'll go and do something worse."

"What did he do there? What did he say?" "They couldn't tell me
themselves; they couldn't make head or tail of it; but he frightened
them all. He came to see the general, who was not at home; so he asked
for Lizabetha Prokofievna. First of all, he begged her for some place,
or situation, for work of some kind, and then he began to complain about
US, about me and my husband, and you, especially YOU; he said a lot of
things."

"Oh! couldn't you find out?" muttered Gania, trembling hysterically.

"No--nothing more than that. Why, they couldn't understand him
themselves; and very likely didn't tell me all."

Gania seized his head with both hands and tottered to the window; Varia
sat down at the other window.

"Funny girl, Aglaya," she observed, after a pause. "When she left me she
said, 'Give my special and personal respects to your parents; I shall
certainly find an opportunity to see your father one day,' and so
serious over it. She's a strange creature."

"Wasn't she joking? She was speaking sarcastically!" "Not a bit of it;
that's just the strange part of it."

"Does she know about father, do you think--or not?"

"That they do NOT know about it in the house is quite certain, the rest
of them, I mean; but you have given me an idea. Aglaya perhaps knows.
She alone, though, if anyone; for the sisters were as astonished as I
was to hear her speak so seriously. If she knows, the prince must have
told her."

"Oh! it's not a great matter to guess who told her. A thief! A thief in
our family, and the head of the family, too!"

"Oh! nonsense!" cried Varia, angrily. "That was nothing but a drunkard's
tale. Nonsense! Why, who invented the whole thing--Lebedeff and the
prince--a pretty pair! Both were probably drunk."

"Father is a drunkard and a thief; I am a beggar, and the husband of my
sister is a usurer," continued Gania, bitterly. "There was a pretty list
of advantages with which to enchant the heart of Aglaya."

"That same husband of your sister, the usurer--"

"Feeds me? Go on. Don't stand on ceremony, pray."

"Don't lose your temper. You are just like a schoolboy. You think that
all this sort of thing would harm you in Aglaya's eyes, do you? You
little know her character. She is capable of refusing the most brilliant
party, and running away and starving in a garret with some wretched
student; that's the sort of girl she is. You never could or did
understand how interesting you would have seen in her eyes if you had
come firmly and proudly through our misfortunes. The prince has simply
caught her with hook and line; firstly, because he never thought of
fishing for her, and secondly, because he is an idiot in the eyes of
most people. It's quite enough for her that by accepting him she puts
her family out and annoys them all round--that's what she likes. You
don't understand these things."

"We shall see whether I understand or no!" said Gania, enigmatically.
"But I shouldn't like her to know all about father, all the same. I
thought the prince would manage to hold his tongue about this, at least.
He prevented Lebedeff spreading the news--he wouldn't even tell me all
when I asked him--"

"Then you must see that he is not responsible. What does it matter to
you now, in any case? What are you hoping for still? If you HAVE a hope
left, it is that your suffering air may soften her heart towards you."

"Oh, she would funk a scandal like anyone else. You are all tarred with
one brush!"

"What! AGLAYA would have funked? You are a chicken-hearted fellow,
Gania!" said Varia, looking at her brother with contempt. "Not one of
us is worth much. Aglaya may be a wild sort of a girl, but she is far
nobler than any of us, a thousand times nobler!"

"Well--come! there's nothing to get cross about," said Gania.

"All I'm afraid of is--mother. I'm afraid this scandal about father may
come to her ears; perhaps it has already. I am dreadfully afraid."

"It undoubtedly has already!" observed Gania.

Varia had risen from her place and had started to go upstairs to her
mother; but at this observation of Gania's she turned and gazed at him
attentively.

"Who could have told her?"

"Hippolyte, probably. He would think it the most delightful amusement in
the world to tell her of it the instant he moved over here; I haven't a
doubt of it."

"But how could he know anything of it? Tell me that. Lebedeff and the
prince determined to tell no one--even Colia knows nothing."

"What, Hippolyte? He found it out himself, of course. Why, you have no
idea what a cunning little animal he is; dirty little gossip! He has
the most extraordinary nose for smelling out other people's secrets, or
anything approaching to scandal. Believe it or not, but I'm pretty sure
he has got round Aglaya. If he hasn't, he soon will. Rogojin is intimate
with him, too. How the prince doesn't notice it, I can't understand. The
little wretch considers me his enemy now and does his best to catch me
tripping. What on earth does it matter to him, when he's dying? However,
you'll see; I shall catch HIM tripping yet, and not he me."

"Why did you get him over here, if you hate him so? And is it really
worth your while to try to score off him?"

"Why, it was yourself who advised me to bring him over!"

"I thought he might be useful. You know he is in love with Aglaya
himself, now, and has written to her; he has even written to Lizabetha
Prokofievna!"

"Oh! he's not dangerous there!" cried Gania, laughing angrily. "However,
I believe there is something of that sort in the air; he is very likely
to be in love, for he is a mere boy. But he won't write anonymous
letters to the old lady; that would be too audacious a thing for him to
attempt; but I dare swear the very first thing he did was to show me up
to Aglaya as a base deceiver and intriguer. I confess I was fool enough
to attempt something through him at first. I thought he would throw
himself into my service out of revengeful feelings towards the prince,
the sly little beast! But I know him better now. As for the theft, he
may have heard of it from the widow in Petersburg, for if the old man
committed himself to such an act, he can have done it for no other
object but to give the money to her. Hippolyte said to me, without any
prelude, that the general had promised the widow four hundred roubles.
Of course I understood, and the little wretch looked at me with a nasty
sort of satisfaction. I know him; you may depend upon it he went and
told mother too, for the pleasure of wounding her. And why doesn't he
die, I should like to know? He undertook to die within three weeks,
and here he is getting fatter. His cough is better, too. It was only
yesterday that he said that was the second day he hadn't coughed blood."

"Well, turn him out!"

"I don't HATE, I despise him," said Gania, grandly. "Well, I do hate
him, if you like!" he added, with a sudden access of rage, "and I'll
tell him so to his face, even when he's dying! If you had but read his
confession--good Lord! what refinement of impudence! Oh, but I'd have
liked to whip him then and there, like a schoolboy, just to see how
surprised he would have been! Now he hates everybody because he--Oh, I
say, what on earth are they doing there! Listen to that noise! I really
can't stand this any longer. Ptitsin!" he cried, as the latter entered
the room, "what in the name of goodness are we coming to? Listen to
that--"

But the noise came rapidly nearer, the door burst open, and old General
Ivolgin, raging, furious, purple-faced, and trembling with anger, rushed
in. He was followed by Nina Alexandrovna, Colia, and behind the rest,
Hippolyte.

II.

HIPPOLYTE had now been five days at the Ptitsins'. His flitting from the
prince's to these new quarters had been brought about quite naturally
and without many words. He did not quarrel with the prince--in fact,
they seemed to part as friends. Gania, who had been hostile enough on
that eventful evening, had himself come to see him a couple of days
later, probably in obedience to some sudden impulse. For some reason or
other, Rogojin too had begun to visit the sick boy. The prince thought
it might be better for him to move away from his (the prince's) house.
Hippolyte informed him, as he took his leave, that Ptitsin "had been
kind enough to offer him a corner," and did not say a word about Gania,
though Gania had procured his invitation, and himself came to fetch him
away. Gania noticed this at the time, and put it to Hippolyte's debit on
account.

Gania was right when he told his sister that Hippolyte was getting
better; that he was better was clear at the first glance. He entered the
room now last of all, deliberately, and with a disagreeable smile on his
lips.

Nina Alexandrovna came in, looking frightened. She had changed much
since we last saw her, half a year ago, and had grown thin and pale.
Colia looked worried and perplexed. He could not understand the vagaries
of the general, and knew nothing of the last achievement of that worthy,
which had caused so much commotion in the house. But he could see that
his father had of late changed very much, and that he had begun to
behave in so extraordinary a fashion both at home and abroad that he
was not like the same man. What perplexed and disturbed him as much as
anything was that his father had entirely given up drinking during the
last few days. Colia knew that he had quarrelled with both Lebedeff and
the prince, and had just bought a small bottle of vodka and brought it
home for his father.

"Really, mother," he had assured Nina Alexandrovna upstairs, "really you
had better let him drink. He has not had a drop for three days; he must
be suffering agonies--The general now entered the room, threw the door
wide open, and stood on the threshold trembling with indignation.

"Look here, my dear sir," he began, addressing Ptitsin in a very loud
tone of voice; "if you have really made up your mind to sacrifice an old
man--your father too or at all events father of your wife--an old man
who has served his emperor--to a wretched little atheist like this, all
I can say is, sir, my foot shall cease to tread your floors. Make your
choice, sir; make your choice quickly, if you please! Me or this--screw!
Yes, screw, sir; I said it accidentally, but let the word stand--this
screw, for he screws and drills himself into my soul--"

"Hadn't you better say corkscrew?" said Hippolyte.

"No, sir, NOT corkscrew. I am a general, not a bottle, sir. Make your
choice, sir--me or him."

Here Colia handed him a chair, and he subsided into it, breathless with
rage.

"Hadn't you better--better--take a nap?" murmured the stupefied Ptitsin.

"A nap?" shrieked the general. "I am not drunk, sir; you insult me!
I see," he continued, rising, "I see that all are against me here.
Enough--I go; but know, sirs--know that--"

He was not allowed to finish his sentence. Somebody pushed him back into
his chair, and begged him to be calm. Nina Alexandrovna trembled, and
cried quietly. Gania retired to the window in disgust.

"But what have I done? What is his grievance?" asked Hippolyte,
grinning.

"What have you done, indeed?" put in Nina Alexandrovna. "You ought to be
ashamed of yourself, teasing an old man like that--and in your position,
too."

"And pray what IS my position, madame? I have the greatest respect for
you, personally; but--"

"He's a little screw," cried the general; "he drills holes my heart
and soul. He wishes me to be a pervert to atheism. Know, you young
greenhorn, that I was covered with honours before ever you were born;
and you are nothing better than a wretched little worm, torn in two with
coughing, and dying slowly of your own malice and unbelief. What did
Gavrila bring you over here for? They're all against me, even to my own
son--all against me."

"Oh, come--nonsense!" cried Gania; "if you did not go shaming us all
over the town, things might be better for all parties."

"What--shame you? I?--what do you mean, you young calf? I shame you? I
can only do you honour, sir; I cannot shame you."

He jumped up from his chair in a fit of uncontrollable rage. Gania was
very angry too.

"Honour, indeed!" said the latter, with contempt.

"What do you say, sir?" growled the general, taking a step towards him.

"I say that I have but to open my mouth, and you--"

Gania began, but did not finish. The two--father and son--stood before
one another, both unspeakably agitated, especially Gania.

"Gania, Gania, reflect!" cried his mother, hurriedly.

"It's all nonsense on both sides," snapped out Varia. "Let them alone,
mother."

"It's only for mother's sake that I spare him," said Gania, tragically.

"Speak!" said the general, beside himself with rage and excitement;
"speak--under the penalty of a father's curse!"

"Oh, father's curse be hanged--you don't frighten me that way!" said
Gania. "Whose fault is it that you have been as mad as a March hare all
this week? It is just a week--you see, I count the days. Take care
now; don't provoke me too much, or I'll tell all. Why did you go to the
Epanchins' yesterday--tell me that? And you call yourself an old
man, too, with grey hair, and father of a family! H'm--nice sort of a
father."

"Be quiet, Gania," cried Colia. "Shut up, you fool!"

"Yes, but how have I offended him?" repeated Hippolyte, still in the
same jeering voice. "Why does he call me a screw? You all heard it. He
came to me himself and began telling me about some Captain Eropegoff.
I don't wish for your company, general. I always avoided you--you know
that. What have I to do with Captain Eropegoff? All I did was to express
my opinion that probably Captain Eropegoff never existed at all!"

"Of course he never existed!" Gania interrupted.

But the general only stood stupefied and gazed around in a dazed way.
Gania's speech had impressed him, with its terrible candour. For the
first moment or two he could find no words to answer him, and it was
only when Hippolyte burst out laughing, and said:

"There, you see! Even your own son supports my statement that there
never was such a person as Captain Eropegoff!" that the old fellow
muttered confusedly:

"Kapiton Eropegoff--not Captain Eropegoff!--Kapiton--major
retired--Eropegoff--Kapiton."

"Kapiton didn't exist either!" persisted Gania, maliciously.

"What? Didn't exist?" cried the poor general, and a deep blush suffused
his face.

"That'll do, Gania!" cried Varia and Ptitsin.

"Shut up, Gania!" said Colia.

But this intercession seemed to rekindle the general.

"What did you mean, sir, that he didn't exist? Explain yourself," he
repeated, angrily.

"Because he DIDN'T exist--never could and never did--there! You'd better
drop the subject, I warn you!"

"And this is my son--my own son--whom I--oh, gracious Heaven!
Eropegoff--Eroshka Eropegoff didn't exist!"

"Ha, ha! it's Eroshka now," laughed Hippolyte.

"No, sir, Kapitoshka--not Eroshka. I mean, Kapiton Alexeyevitch--retired
major--married Maria Petrovna Lu--Lu--he was my friend and
companion--Lutugoff--from our earliest beginnings. I closed his eyes for
him--he was killed. Kapiton Eropegoff never existed! tfu!"
