
The general shouted in his fury; but it was to be concluded that his
wrath was not kindled by the expressed doubt as to Kapiton's existence.
This was his scapegoat; but his excitement was caused by something quite
different. As a rule he would have merely shouted down the doubt as
to Kapiton, told a long yarn about his friend, and eventually retired
upstairs to his room. But today, in the strange uncertainty of human
nature, it seemed to require but so small an offence as this to make
his cup to overflow. The old man grew purple in the face, he raised his
hands. "Enough of this!" he yelled. "My curse--away, out of the house
I go! Colia, bring my bag away!" He left the room hastily and in a
paroxysm of rage.

His wife, Colia, and Ptitsin ran out after him.

"What have you done now?" said Varia to Gania. "He'll probably be making
off THERE again! What a disgrace it all is!"

"Well, he shouldn't steal," cried Gania, panting with fury. And just at
this moment his eye met Hippolyte's.

"As for you, sir," he cried, "you should at least remember that you are
in a strange house and--receiving hospitality; you should not take the
opportunity of tormenting an old man, sir, who is too evidently out of
his mind."

Hippolyte looked furious, but he restrained himself.

"I don't quite agree with you that your father is out of his mind," he
observed, quietly. "On the contrary, I cannot help thinking he has been
less demented of late. Don't you think so? He has grown so cunning and
careful, and weighs his words so deliberately; he spoke to me about that
Kapiton fellow with an object, you know! Just fancy--he wanted me to--"

"Oh, devil take what he wanted you to do! Don't try to be too cunning
with me, young man!" shouted Gania. "If you are aware of the real reason
for my father's present condition (and you have kept such an excellent
spying watch during these last few days that you are sure to be aware of
it)--you had no right whatever to torment the--unfortunate man, and to
worry my mother by your exaggerations of the affair; because the whole
business is nonsense--simply a drunken freak, and nothing more, quite
unproved by any evidence, and I don't believe that much of it!" (he
snapped his fingers). "But you must needs spy and watch over us all,
because you are a-a--"

"Screw!" laughed Hippolyte.

"Because you are a humbug, sir; and thought fit to worry people for half
an hour, and tried to frighten them into believing that you would shoot
yourself with your little empty pistol, pirouetting about and playing at
suicide! I gave you hospitality, you have fattened on it, your cough has
left you, and you repay all this--"

"Excuse me--two words! I am Varvara Ardalionovna's guest, not yours;
YOU have extended no hospitality to me. On the contrary, if I am
not mistaken, I believe you are yourself indebted to Mr. Ptitsin's
hospitality. Four days ago I begged my mother to come down here and find
lodgings, because I certainly do feel better here, though I am not fat,
nor have I ceased to cough. I am today informed that my room is ready
for me; therefore, having thanked your sister and mother for their
kindness to me, I intend to leave the house this evening. I beg your
pardon--I interrupted you--I think you were about to add something?"

"Oh--if that is the state of affairs--" began Gania.

"Excuse me--I will take a seat," interrupted Hippolyte once more,
sitting down deliberately; "for I am not strong yet. Now then, I am
ready to hear you. Especially as this is the last chance we shall have
of a talk, and very likely the last meeting we shall ever have at all."

Gania felt a little guilty.

"I assure you I did not mean to reckon up debits and credits," he began,
"and if you--"

"I don't understand your condescension," said Hippolyte. "As for me, I
promised myself, on the first day of my arrival in this house, that
I would have the satisfaction of settling accounts with you in a very
thorough manner before I said good-bye to you. I intend to perform this
operation now, if you like; after you, though, of course."

"May I ask you to be so good as to leave this room?"

"You'd better speak out. You'll be sorry afterwards if you don't."

"Hippolyte, stop, please! It's so dreadfully undignified," said Varia.

"Well, only for the sake of a lady," said Hippolyte, laughing. "I
am ready to put off the reckoning, but only put it off, Varvara
Ardalionovna, because an explanation between your brother and myself has
become an absolute necessity, and I could not think of leaving the house
without clearing up all misunderstandings first."

"In a word, you are a wretched little scandal-monger," cried Gania, "and
you cannot go away without a scandal!"

"You see," said Hippolyte, coolly, "you can't restrain yourself. You'll
be dreadfully sorry afterwards if you don't speak out now. Come, you
shall have the first say. I'll wait."

Gania was silent and merely looked contemptuously at him.

"You won't? Very well. I shall be as short as possible, for my part. Two
or three times to-day I have had the word 'hospitality' pushed down my
throat; this is not fair. In inviting me here you yourself entrapped
me for your own use; you thought I wished to revenge myself upon the
prince. You heard that Aglaya Ivanovna had been kind to me and read my
confession. Making sure that I should give myself up to your interests,
you hoped that you might get some assistance out of me. I will not go
into details. I don't ask either admission or confirmation of this from
yourself; I am quite content to leave you to your conscience, and to
feel that we understand one another capitally."

"What a history you are weaving out of the most ordinary circumstances!"
cried Varia.

"I told you the fellow was nothing but a scandalmonger," said Gania.

"Excuse me, Varia Ardalionovna, I will proceed. I can, of course,
neither love nor respect the prince, though he is a good-hearted fellow,
if a little queer. But there is no need whatever for me to hate him. I
quite understood your brother when he first offered me aid against the
prince, though I did not show it; I knew well that your brother was
making a ridiculous mistake in me. I am ready to spare him, however,
even now; but solely out of respect for yourself, Varvara Ardalionovna.

"Having now shown you that I am not quite such a fool as I look, and
that I have to be fished for with a rod and line for a good long while
before I am caught, I will proceed to explain why I specially wished to
make your brother look a fool. That my motive power is hate, I do not
attempt to conceal. I have felt that before dying (and I am dying,
however much fatter I may appear to you), I must absolutely make a fool
of, at least, one of that class of men which has dogged me all my life,
which I hate so cordially, and which is so prominently represented by
your much esteemed brother. I should not enjoy paradise nearly so much
without having done this first. I hate you, Gavrila Ardalionovitch,
solely (this may seem curious to you, but I repeat)--solely because you
are the type, and incarnation, and head, and crown of the most impudent,
the most self-satisfied, the most vulgar and detestable form of
commonplaceness. You are ordinary of the ordinary; you have no chance of
ever fathering the pettiest idea of your own. And yet you are as jealous
and conceited as you can possibly be; you consider yourself a great
genius; of this you are persuaded, although there are dark moments of
doubt and rage, when even this fact seems uncertain. There are spots
of darkness on your horizon, though they will disappear when you become
completely stupid. But a long and chequered path lies before you, and
of this I am glad. In the first place you will never gain a certain
person."

"Come, come! This is intolerable! You had better stop, you little
mischief-making wretch!" cried Varia. Gania had grown very pale; he
trembled, but said nothing.

Hippolyte paused, and looked at him intently and with great
gratification. He then turned his gaze upon Varia, bowed, and went out,
without adding another word.

Gania might justly complain of the hardness with which fate treated him.
Varia dared not speak to him for a long while, as he strode past her,
backwards and forwards. At last he went and stood at the window, looking
out, with his back turned towards her. There was a fearful row going on
upstairs again.

"Are you off?" said Gania, suddenly, remarking that she had risen and
was about to leave the room. "Wait a moment--look at this."

He approached the table and laid a small sheet of paper before her. It
looked like a little note.

"Good heavens!" cried Varia, raising her hands.

This was the note:

"GAVRILA ARDOLIONOVITCH,--persuaded of your kindness of heart, I have
determined to ask your advice on a matter of great importance to myself.
I should like to meet you tomorrow morning at seven o'clock by the green
bench in the park. It is not far from our house. Varvara Ardalionovna,
who must accompany you, knows the place well.

"A. E."

"What on earth is one to make of a girl like that?" said Varia.

Gania, little as he felt inclined for swagger at this moment, could
not avoid showing his triumph, especially just after such humiliating
remarks as those of Hippolyte. A smile of self-satisfaction beamed on
his face, and Varia too was brimming over with delight.

"And this is the very day that they were to announce the engagement!
What will she do next?"

"What do you suppose she wants to talk about tomorrow?" asked Gania.

"Oh, THAT'S all the same! The chief thing is that she wants to see you
after six months' absence. Look here, Gania, this is a SERIOUS business.
Don't swagger again and lose the game--play carefully, but don't funk,
do you understand? As if she could possibly avoid seeing what I have
been working for all this last six months! And just imagine, I was there
this morning and not a word of this! I was there, you know, on the sly.
The old lady did not know, or she would have kicked me out. I ran some
risk for you, you see. I did so want to find out, at all hazards."

Here there was a frantic noise upstairs once more; several people seemed
to be rushing downstairs at once.

"Now, Gania," cried Varia, frightened, "we can't let him go out! We
can't afford to have a breath of scandal about the town at this moment.
Run after him and beg his pardon--quick."

But the father of the family was out in the road already. Colia was
carrying his bag for him; Nina Alexandrovna stood and cried on the
doorstep; she wanted to run after the general, but Ptitsin kept her
back.

"You will only excite him more," he said. "He has nowhere else to go
to--he'll be back here in half an hour. I've talked it all over with
Colia; let him play the fool a bit, it will do him good."

"What are you up to? Where are you off to? You've nowhere to go to, you
know," cried Gania, out of the window.

"Come back, father; the neighbours will hear!" cried Varia.

The general stopped, turned round, raised his hands and remarked: "My
curse be upon this house!"

"Which observation should always be made in as theatrical a tone as
possible," muttered Gania, shutting the window with a bang.

The neighbours undoubtedly did hear. Varia rushed out of the room.

No sooner had his sister left him alone, than Gania took the note out of
his pocket, kissed it, and pirouetted around.

III.

As a general rule, old General Ivolgin's paroxysms ended in smoke. He
had before this experienced fits of sudden fury, but not very often,
because he was really a man of peaceful and kindly disposition. He had
tried hundreds of times to overcome the dissolute habits which he had
contracted of late years. He would suddenly remember that he was "a
father," would be reconciled with his wife, and shed genuine tears.
His feeling for Nina Alexandrovna amounted almost to adoration; she had
pardoned so much in silence, and loved him still in spite of the state
of degradation into which he had fallen. But the general's struggles
with his own weakness never lasted very long. He was, in his way, an
impetuous man, and a quiet life of repentance in the bosom of his family
soon became insupportable to him. In the end he rebelled, and flew into
rages which he regretted, perhaps, even as he gave way to them, but
which were beyond his control. He picked quarrels with everyone,
began to hold forth eloquently, exacted unlimited respect, and at last
disappeared from the house, and sometimes did not return for a long
time. He had given up interfering in the affairs of his family for
two years now, and knew nothing about them but what he gathered from
hearsay.

But on this occasion there was something more serious than usual.
Everyone seemed to know something, but to be afraid to talk about it.

The general had turned up in the bosom of his family two or three days
before, but not, as usual, with the olive branch of peace in his hand,
not in the garb of penitence--in which he was usually clad on such
occasions--but, on the contrary, in an uncommonly bad temper. He had
arrived in a quarrelsome mood, pitching into everyone he came across,
and talking about all sorts and kinds of subjects in the most unexpected
manner, so that it was impossible to discover what it was that was
really putting him out. At moments he would be apparently quite bright
and happy; but as a rule he would sit moody and thoughtful. He would
abruptly commence to hold forth about the Epanchins, about Lebedeff, or
the prince, and equally abruptly would stop short and refuse to speak
another word, answering all further questions with a stupid smile,
unconscious that he was smiling, or that he had been asked a question.
The whole of the previous night he had spent tossing about and groaning,
and poor Nina Alexandrovna had been busy making cold compresses and warm
fomentations and so on, without being very clear how to apply them. He
had fallen asleep after a while, but not for long, and had awaked in
a state of violent hypochondria which had ended in his quarrel with
Hippolyte, and the solemn cursing of Ptitsin's establishment generally.
It was also observed during those two or three days that he was in a
state of morbid self-esteem, and was specially touchy on all points of
honour. Colia insisted, in discussing the matter with his mother, that
all this was but the outcome of abstinence from drink, or perhaps of
pining after Lebedeff, with whom up to this time the general had been
upon terms of the greatest friendship; but with whom, for some reason
or other, he had quarrelled a few days since, parting from him in great
wrath. There had also been a scene with the prince. Colia had asked an
explanation of the latter, but had been forced to conclude that he was
not told the whole truth.

If Hippolyte and Nina Alexandrovna had, as Gania suspected, had some
special conversation about the general's actions, it was strange that
the malicious youth, whom Gania had called a scandal-monger to his face,
had not allowed himself a similar satisfaction with Colia.

The fact is that probably Hippolyte was not quite so black as Gania
painted him; and it was hardly likely that he had informed Nina
Alexandrovna of certain events, of which we know, for the mere pleasure
of giving her pain. We must never forget that human motives are
generally far more complicated than we are apt to suppose, and that we
can very rarely accurately describe the motives of another. It is much
better for the writer, as a rule, to content himself with the bare
statement of events; and we shall take this line with regard to the
catastrophe recorded above, and shall state the remaining events
connected with the general's trouble shortly, because we feel that
we have already given to this secondary character in our story more
attention than we originally intended.

The course of events had marched in the following order. When Lebedeff
returned, in company with the general, after their expedition to town a
few days since, for the purpose of investigation, he brought the prince
no information whatever. If the latter had not himself been occupied
with other thoughts and impressions at the time, he must have observed
that Lebedeff not only was very uncommunicative, but even appeared
anxious to avoid him.

When the prince did give the matter a little attention, he recalled
the fact that during these days he had always found Lebedeff to be in
radiantly good spirits, when they happened to meet; and further, that
the general and Lebedeff were always together. The two friends did not
seem ever to be parted for a moment.

Occasionally the prince heard loud talking and laughing upstairs, and
once he detected the sound of a jolly soldier's song going on above, and
recognized the unmistakable bass of the general's voice. But the sudden
outbreak of song did not last; and for an hour afterwards the animated
sound of apparently drunken conversation continued to be heard from
above. At length there was the clearest evidence of a grand mutual
embracing, and someone burst into tears. Shortly after this, however,
there was a violent but short-lived quarrel, with loud talking on both
sides.

All these days Colia had been in a state of great mental preoccupation.
Muishkin was usually out all day, and only came home late at night. On
his return he was invariably informed that Colia had been looking for
him. However, when they did meet, Colia never had anything particular to
tell him, excepting that he was highly dissatisfied with the general and
his present condition of mind and behaviour.

"They drag each other about the place," he said, "and get drunk together
at the pub close by here, and quarrel in the street on the way home, and
embrace one another after it, and don't seem to part for a moment."

When the prince pointed out that there was nothing new about that, for
that they had always behaved in this manner together, Colia did not know
what to say; in fact he could not explain what it was that specially
worried him, just now, about his father.

On the morning following the bacchanalian songs and quarrels recorded
above, as the prince stepped out of the house at about eleven o'clock,
the general suddenly appeared before him, much agitated.

"I have long sought the honour and opportunity of meeting
you--much-esteemed Lef Nicolaievitch," he murmured, pressing the
prince's hand very hard, almost painfully so; "long--very long."

The prince begged him to step in and sit down.

"No--I will not sit down,--I am keeping you, I see,--another time!--I
think I may be permitted to congratulate you upon the realization of
your heart's best wishes, is it not so?"

"What best wishes?"

The prince blushed. He thought, as so many in his position do, that
nobody had seen, heard, noticed, or understood anything.

"Oh--be easy, sir, be easy! I shall not wound your tenderest feelings.
I've been through it all myself, and I know well how unpleasant it is
when an outsider sticks his nose in where he is not wanted. I experience
this every morning. I came to speak to you about another matter, though,
an important matter. A very important matter, prince."

The latter requested him to take a seat once more, and sat down himself.

"Well--just for one second, then. The fact is, I came for advice. Of
course I live now without any very practical objects in life; but,
being full of self-respect, in which quality the ordinary Russian is so
deficient as a rule, and of activity, I am desirous, in a word, prince,
of placing myself and my wife and children in a position of--in fact, I
want advice."

The prince commended his aspirations with warmth.

"Quite so--quite so! But this is all mere nonsense. I came here to speak
of something quite different, something very important, prince. And
I have determined to come to you as to a man in whose sincerity and
nobility of feeling I can trust like--like--are you surprised at my
words, prince?"

The prince was watching his guest, if not with much surprise, at all
events with great attention and curiosity.

The old man was very pale; every now and then his lips trembled, and his
hands seemed unable to rest quietly, but continually moved from place to
place. He had twice already jumped up from his chair and sat down again
without being in the least aware of it. He would take up a hook from
the table and open it--talking all the while,--look at the heading of a
chapter, shut it and put it back again, seizing another immediately, but
holding it unopened in his hand, and waving it in the air as he spoke.

"But enough!" he cried, suddenly. "I see I have been boring you with
my--"

"Not in the least--not in the least, I assure you. On the contrary, I am
listening most attentively, and am anxious to guess-"

"Prince, I wish to place myself in a respectable position--I wish to
esteem myself--and to--"

"My dear sir, a man of such noble aspirations is worthy of all esteem by
virtue of those aspirations alone."

The prince brought out his "copy-book sentence" in the firm belief that
it would produce a good effect. He felt instinctively that some such
well-sounding humbug, brought out at the proper moment, would soothe the
old man's feelings, and would be specially acceptable to such a man in
such a position. At all hazards, his guest must be despatched with heart
relieved and spirit comforted; that was the problem before the prince at
this moment.

The phrase flattered the general, touched him, and pleased him mightily.
He immediately changed his tone, and started off on a long and solemn
explanation. But listen as he would, the prince could make neither head
nor tail of it.

The general spoke hotly and quickly for ten minutes; he spoke as though
his words could not keep pace with his crowding thoughts. Tears stood
in his eyes, and yet his speech was nothing but a collection of
disconnected sentences, without beginning and without end--a string of
unexpected words and unexpected sentiments--colliding with one another,
and jumping over one another, as they burst from his lips.

"Enough!" he concluded at last, "you understand me, and that is the
great thing. A heart like yours cannot help understanding the sufferings
of another. Prince, you are the ideal of generosity; what are other men
beside yourself? But you are young--accept my blessing! My
principal object is to beg you to fix an hour for a most important
conversation--that is my great hope, prince. My heart needs but a little
friendship and sympathy, and yet I cannot always find means to satisfy
it."

"But why not now? I am ready to listen, and--"

"No, no--prince, not now! Now is a dream! And it is too, too important!
It is to be the hour of Fate to me--MY OWN hour. Our interview is not
to be broken in upon by every chance comer, every impertinent guest--and
there are plenty of such stupid, impertinent fellows"--(he bent over and
whispered mysteriously, with a funny, frightened look on his face)--"who
are unworthy to tie your shoe, prince. I don't say MINE, mind--you will
understand me, prince. Only YOU understand me, prince--no one else.
HE doesn't understand me, he is absolutely--ABSOLUTELY unable to
sympathize. The first qualification for understanding another is Heart."

The prince was rather alarmed at all this, and was obliged to end by
appointing the same hour of the following day for the interview desired.
The general left him much comforted and far less agitated than when he
had arrived.

At seven in the evening, the prince sent to request Lebedeff to pay
him a visit. Lebedeff came at once, and "esteemed it an honour," as he
observed, the instant he entered the room. He acted as though there
had never been the slightest suspicion of the fact that he had
systematically avoided the prince for the last three days.

He sat down on the edge of his chair, smiling and making faces,
and rubbing his hands, and looking as though he were in delighted
expectation of hearing some important communication, which had been long
guessed by all.

The prince was instantly covered with confusion; for it appeared to be
plain that everyone expected something of him--that everyone looked at
him as though anxious to congratulate him, and greeted him with hints,
and smiles, and knowing looks.

Keller, for instance, had run into the house three times of late, "just
for a moment," and each time with the air of desiring to offer his
congratulations. Colia, too, in spite of his melancholy, had once
or twice begun sentences in much the same strain of suggestion or
insinuation.

The prince, however, immediately began, with some show of annoyance, to
question Lebedeff categorically, as to the general's present condition,
and his opinion thereon. He described the morning's interview in a few
words.

"Everyone has his worries, prince, especially in these strange and
troublous times of ours," Lebedeff replied, drily, and with the air of a
man disappointed of his reasonable expectations.

"Dear me, what a philosopher you are!" laughed the prince.

"Philosophy is necessary, sir--very necessary--in our day. It is too
much neglected. As for me, much esteemed prince, I am sensible of having
experienced the honour of your confidence in a certain matter up to
a certain point, but never beyond that point. I do not for a moment
complain--"

"Lebedeff, you seem to be angry for some reason!" said the prince.

"Not the least bit in the world, esteemed and revered prince! Not the
least bit in the world!" cried Lebedeff, solemnly, with his hand upon
his heart. "On the contrary, I am too painfully aware that neither by my
position in the world, nor by my gifts of intellect and heart, nor by
my riches, nor by any former conduct of mine, have I in any way deserved
your confidence, which is far above my highest aspirations and hopes.
Oh no, prince; I may serve you, but only as your humble slave! I am not
angry, oh no! Not angry; pained perhaps, but nothing more.

"My dear Lebedeff, I--"

"Oh, nothing more, nothing more! I was saying to myself but now... 'I am
quite unworthy of friendly relations with him,' say I; 'but perhaps as
landlord of this house I may, at some future date, in his good time,
receive information as to certain imminent and much to be desired
changes--'"

So saying Lebedeff fixed the prince with his sharp little eyes, still in
hope that he would get his curiosity satisfied.

The prince looked back at him in amazement.

"I don't understand what you are driving at!" he cried, almost angrily,
"and, and--what an intriguer you are, Lebedeff!" he added, bursting into
a fit of genuine laughter.

Lebedeff followed suit at once, and it was clear from his radiant face
that he considered his prospects of satisfaction immensely improved.

"And do you know," the prince continued, "I am amazed at your naive
ways, Lebedeff! Don't be angry with me--not only yours, everybody else's
also! You are waiting to hear something from me at this very moment with
such simplicity that I declare I feel quite ashamed of myself for having
nothing whatever to tell you. I swear to you solemnly, that there is
nothing to tell. There! Can you take that in?" The prince laughed again.

Lebedeff assumed an air of dignity. It was true enough that he was
sometimes naive to a degree in his curiosity; but he was also an
excessively cunning gentleman, and the prince was almost converting
him into an enemy by his repeated rebuffs. The prince did not snub
Lebedeff's curiosity, however, because he felt any contempt for him; but
simply because the subject was too delicate to talk about. Only a few
days before he had looked upon his own dreams almost as crimes. But
Lebedeff considered the refusal as caused by personal dislike to
himself, and was hurt accordingly. Indeed, there was at this moment a
piece of news, most interesting to the prince, which Lebedeff knew
and even had wished to tell him, but which he now kept obstinately to
himself.

"And what can I do for you, esteemed prince? Since I am told you sent
for me just now," he said, after a few moments' silence.

"Oh, it was about the general," began the prince, waking abruptly from
the fit of musing which he too had indulged in "and-and about the theft
you told me of."

"That is--er--about--what theft?"

"Oh come! just as if you didn't understand, Lukian Timofeyovitch! What
are you up to? I can't make you out! The money, the money, sir! The four
hundred roubles that you lost that day. You came and told me about
it one morning, and then went off to Petersburg. There, NOW do you
understand?"

"Oh--h--h! You mean the four hundred roubles!" said Lebedeff, dragging
the words out, just as though it had only just dawned upon him what
the prince was talking about. "Thanks very much, prince, for your kind
interest--you do me too much honour. I found the money, long ago!"

"You found it? Thank God for that!"

"Your exclamation proves the generous sympathy of your nature, prince;
for four hundred roubles--to a struggling family man like myself--is no
small matter!"

"I didn't mean that; at least, of course, I'm glad for your sake, too,"
added the prince, correcting himself, "but--how did you find it?"

"Very simply indeed! I found it under the chair upon which my coat had
hung; so that it is clear the purse simply fell out of the pocket and on
to the floor!"

"Under the chair? Impossible! Why, you told me yourself that you had
searched every corner of the room? How could you not have looked in the
most likely place of all?"

"Of course I looked there,--of course I did! Very much so! I looked and
scrambled about, and felt for it, and wouldn't believe it was not there,
and looked again and again. It is always so in such cases. One longs and
expects to find a lost article; one sees it is not there, and the place
is as bare as one's palm; and yet one returns and looks again and again,
fifteen or twenty times, likely enough!"

"Oh, quite so, of course. But how was it in your case?--I don't quite
understand," said the bewildered prince. "You say it wasn't there at
first, and that you searched the place thoroughly, and yet it turned up
on that very spot!"

"Yes, sir--on that very spot." The prince gazed strangely at Lebedeff.
"And the general?" he asked, abruptly.

"The--the general? How do you mean, the general?" said Lebedeff,
dubiously, as though he had not taken in the drift of the prince's
remark.

"Oh, good heavens! I mean, what did the general say when the purse
turned up under the chair? You and he had searched for it together
there, hadn't you?"

"Quite so--together! But the second time I thought better to say nothing
about finding it. I found it alone."

"But--why in the world--and the money? Was it all there?"

"I opened the purse and counted it myself; right to a single rouble."

"I think you might have come and told me," said the prince,
thoughtfully.

"Oh--I didn't like to disturb you, prince, in the midst of your private
and doubtless most interesting personal reflections. Besides, I wanted
to appear, myself, to have found nothing. I took the purse, and opened
it, and counted the money, and shut it and put it down again under the
chair."

"What in the world for?"

"Oh, just out of curiosity," said Lebedeff, rubbing his hands and
sniggering.

"What, it's still there then, is it? Ever since the day before
yesterday?"

"Oh no! You see, I was half in hopes the general might find it. Because
if I found it, why should not he too observe an object lying before his
very eyes? I moved the chair several times so as to expose the purse
to view, but the general never saw it. He is very absent just now,
evidently. He talks and laughs and tells stories, and suddenly flies
into a rage with me, goodness knows why."

"Well, but--have you taken the purse away now?"

"No, it disappeared from under the chair in the night."

"Where is it now, then?"

"Here," laughed Lebedeff, at last, rising to his full height and looking
pleasantly at the prince, "here, in the lining of my coat. Look, you can
feel it for yourself, if you like!"

Sure enough there was something sticking out of the front of the
coat--something large. It certainly felt as though it might well be the
purse fallen through a hole in the pocket into the lining.

"I took it out and had a look at it; it's all right. I've let it slip
back into the lining now, as you see, and so I have been walking about
ever since yesterday morning; it knocks against my legs when I walk
along."

"H'm! and you take no notice of it?"

"Quite so, I take no notice of it. Ha, ha! and think of this, prince,
my pockets are always strong and whole, and yet, here in one night, is a
huge hole. I know the phenomenon is unworthy of your notice; but such is
the case. I examined the hole, and I declare it actually looks as though
it had been made with a pen-knife, a most improbable contingency."

"And--and--the general?"

"Ah, very angry all day, sir; all yesterday and all today. He shows
decided bacchanalian predilections at one time, and at another is
tearful and sensitive, but at any moment he is liable to paroxysms of
such rage that I assure you, prince, I am quite alarmed. I am not
a military man, you know. Yesterday we were sitting together in
the tavern, and the lining of my coat was--quite accidentally, of
course--sticking out right in front. The general squinted at it, and
flew into a rage. He never looks me quite in the face now, unless he is
very drunk or maudlin; but yesterday he looked at me in such a way that
a shiver went all down my back. I intend to find the purse tomorrow; but
till then I am going to have another night of it with him."

"What's the good of tormenting him like this?" cried the prince.

"I don't torment him, prince, I don't indeed!" cried Lebedeff, hotly. "I
love him, my dear sir, I esteem him; and believe it or not, I love him
all the better for this business, yes--and value him more."

Lebedeff said this so seriously that the prince quite lost his temper
with him.

"Nonsense! love him and torment him so! Why, by the very fact that he
put the purse prominently before you, first under the chair and then
in your lining, he shows that he does not wish to deceive you, but is
anxious to beg your forgiveness in this artless way. Do you hear? He is
asking your pardon. He confides in the delicacy of your feelings, and
in your friendship for him. And you can allow yourself to humiliate so
thoroughly honest a man!"

"Thoroughly honest, quite so, prince, thoroughly honest!" said Lebedeff,
with flashing eyes. "And only you, prince, could have found so very
appropriate an expression. I honour you for it, prince. Very well,
that's settled; I shall find the purse now and not tomorrow. Here, I
find it and take it out before your eyes! And the money is all right.
Take it, prince, and keep it till tomorrow, will you? Tomorrow or next
day I'll take it back again. I think, prince, that the night after
its disappearance it was buried under a bush in the garden. So I
believe--what do you think of that?"

"Well, take care you don't tell him to his face that you have found the
purse. Simply let him see that it is no longer in the lining of your
coat, and form his own conclusions."

"Do you think so? Had I not just better tell him I have found it, and
pretend I never guessed where it was?"

"No, I don't think so," said the prince, thoughtfully; "it's too late
for that--that would be dangerous now. No, no! Better say nothing about
it. Be nice with him, you know, but don't show him--oh, YOU know well
enough--"

"I know, prince, of course I know, but I'm afraid I shall not carry
it out; for to do so one needs a heart like your own. He is so very
irritable just now, and so proud. At one moment he will embrace me,
and the next he flies out at me and sneers at me, and then I stick the
lining forward on purpose. Well, au revoir, prince, I see I am keeping
you, and boring you, too, interfering with your most interesting private
reflections."

"Now, do be careful! Secrecy, as before!"

"Oh, silence isn't the word! Softly, softly!"

But in spite of this conclusion to the episode, the prince remained as
puzzled as ever, if not more so. He awaited next morning's interview
with the general most impatiently.

IV.

THE time appointed was twelve o'clock, and the prince, returning home
unexpectedly late, found the general waiting for him. At the first
glance, he saw that the latter was displeased, perhaps because he had
been kept waiting. The prince apologized, and quickly took a seat. He
seemed strangely timid before the general this morning, for some reason,
and felt as though his visitor were some piece of china which he was
afraid of breaking.

On scrutinizing him, the prince soon saw that the general was quite a
different man from what he had been the day before; he looked like one
who had come to some momentous resolve. His calmness, however, was more
apparent than real. He was courteous, but there was a suggestion of
injured innocence in his manner.

"I've brought your book back," he began, indicating a book lying on the
table. "Much obliged to you for lending it to me."

"Ah, yes. Well, did you read it, general? It's curious, isn't it?" said
the prince, delighted to be able to open up conversation upon an outside
subject.

"Curious enough, yes, but crude, and of course dreadful nonsense;
probably the man lies in every other sentence."

The general spoke with considerable confidence, and dragged his words
out with a conceited drawl.

"Oh, but it's only the simple tale of an old soldier who saw the French
enter Moscow. Some of his remarks were wonderfully interesting. Remarks
of an eye-witness are always valuable, whoever he be, don't you think so?"

"Had I been the publisher I should not have printed it. As to the
evidence of eye-witnesses, in these days people prefer impudent lies to
the stories of men of worth and long service. I know of some notes of
the year 1812, which--I have determined, prince, to leave this house,
Mr. Lebedeff's house."

The general looked significantly at his host.

"Of course you have your own lodging at Pavlofsk at--at your daughter's
house," began the prince, quite at a loss what to say. He suddenly
recollected that the general had come for advice on a most important
matter, affecting his destiny.

"At my wife's; in other words, at my own place, my daughter's house."

"I beg your pardon, I--"

"I leave Lebedeff's house, my dear prince, because I have quarrelled
with this person. I broke with him last night, and am very sorry that I
did not do so before. I expect respect, prince, even from those to whom
I give my heart, so to speak. Prince, I have often given away my heart,
and am nearly always deceived. This person was quite unworthy of the
gift."

"There is much that might be improved in him," said the prince,
moderately, "but he has some qualities which--though amid them one
cannot but discern a cunning nature--reveal what is often a diverting
intellect."

The prince's tone was so natural and respectful that the general could
not possibly suspect him of any insincerity.

"Oh, that he possesses good traits, I was the first to show, when I very
nearly made him a present of my friendship. I am not dependent upon his
hospitality, and upon his house; I have my own family. I do not attempt
to justify my own weakness. I have drunk with this man, and perhaps I
deplore the fact now, but I did not take him up for the sake of drink
alone (excuse the crudeness of the expression, prince); I did not make
friends with him for that alone. I was attracted by his good qualities;
but when the fellow declares that he was a child in 1812, and had his
left leg cut off, and buried in the Vagarkoff cemetery, in Moscow,
such a cock-and-bull story amounts to disrespect, my dear sir, to--to
impudent exaggeration."

"Oh, he was very likely joking; he said it for fun."

"I quite understand you. You mean that an innocent lie for the sake of a
good joke is harmless, and does not offend the human heart. Some people
lie, if you like to put it so, out of pure friendship, in order to amuse
their fellows; but when a man makes use of extravagance in order to show
his disrespect and to make clear how the intimacy bores him, it is time
for a man of honour to break off the said intimacy., and to teach the
offender his place."

The general flushed with indignation as he spoke.

"Oh, but Lebedeff cannot have been in Moscow in 1812. He is much too
young; it is all nonsense."

"Very well, but even if we admit that he was alive in 1812, can one
believe that a French chasseur pointed a cannon at him for a lark, and
shot his left leg off? He says he picked his own leg up and took it away
and buried it in the cemetery. He swore he had a stone put up over
it with the inscription: 'Here lies the leg of Collegiate Secretary
Lebedeff,' and on the other side, 'Rest, beloved ashes, till the morn of
joy,' and that he has a service read over it every year (which is simply
sacrilege), and goes to Moscow once a year on purpose. He invites me to
Moscow in order to prove his assertion, and show me his leg's tomb, and
the very cannon that shot him; he says it's the eleventh from the
gate of the Kremlin, an old-fashioned falconet taken from the French
afterwards."

"And, meanwhile both his legs are still on his body," said the prince,
laughing. "I assure you, it is only an innocent joke, and you need not
be angry about it."

"Excuse me--wait a minute--he says that the leg we see is a wooden one,
made by Tchernosvitoff."

"They do say one can dance with those!"

"Quite so, quite so; and he swears that his wife never found out that
one of his legs was wooden all the while they were married. When I
showed him the ridiculousness of all this, he said, 'Well, if you were
one of Napoleon's pages in 1812, you might let me bury my leg in the
Moscow cemetery.'

"Why, did you say--" began the prince, and paused in confusion.

The general gazed at his host disdainfully.

"Oh, go on," he said, "finish your sentence, by all means. Say how odd
it appears to you that a man fallen to such a depth of humiliation as
I, can ever have been the actual eye-witness of great events. Go on, I
don't mind! Has he found time to tell you scandal about me?"

"No, I've heard nothing of this from Lebedeff, if you mean Lebedeff."

"H'm; I thought differently. You see, we were talking over this period
of history. I was criticizing a current report of something which then
happened, and having been myself an eye-witness of the occurrence--you
are smiling, prince--you are looking at my face as if--"

"Oh no! not at all--I--"

"I am rather young-looking, I know; but I am actually older than I
appear to be. I was ten or eleven in the year 1812. I don't know my age
exactly, but it has always been a weakness of mine to make it out less
than it really is.

"I assure you, general, I do not in the least doubt your statement. One
of our living autobiographers states that when he was a small baby in
Moscow in 1812 the French soldiers fed him with bread."

"Well, there you see!" said the general, condescendingly. "There is
nothing whatever unusual about my tale. Truth very often appears to
be impossible. I was a page--it sounds strange, I dare say. Had I been
fifteen years old I should probably have been terribly frightened
when the French arrived, as my mother was (who had been too slow about
clearing out of Moscow); but as I was only just ten I was not in the
least alarmed, and rushed through the crowd to the very door of the
palace when Napoleon alighted from his horse."

"Undoubtedly, at ten years old you would not have felt the sense of
fear, as you say," blurted out the prince, horribly uncomfortable in the
sensation that he was just about to blush.

"Of course; and it all happened so easily and naturally. And yet, were
a novelist to describe the episode, he would put in all kinds of
impossible and incredible details."

"Oh," cried the prince, "I have often thought that! Why, I know of a
murder, for the sake of a watch. It's in all the papers now. But if
some writer had invented it, all the critics would have jumped down his
throat and said the thing was too improbable for anything. And yet you
read it in the paper, and you can't help thinking that out of these
strange disclosures is to be gained the full knowledge of Russian life
and character. You said that well, general; it is so true," concluded
the prince, warmly, delighted to have found a refuge from the fiery
blushes which had covered his face.

"Yes, it's quite true, isn't it?" cried the general, his eyes sparkling
with gratification. "A small boy, a child, would naturally realize no
danger; he would shove his way through the crowds to see the shine and
glitter of the uniforms, and especially the great man of whom everyone
was speaking, for at that time all the world had been talking of no one
but this man for some years past. The world was full of his name; I--so
to speak--drew it in with my mother's milk. Napoleon, passing a couple
of paces from me, caught sight of me accidentally. I was very well
dressed, and being all alone, in that crowd, as you will easily
imagine...

"Oh, of course! Naturally the sight impressed him, and proved to him
that not ALL the aristocracy had left Moscow; that at least some nobles
and their children had remained behind."

Just so just so! He wanted to win over the aristocracy! When his eagle
eye fell on me, mine probably flashed back in response.' Voila un garcon
bien eveille! Qui est ton pere?' I immediately replied, almost panting
with excitement, 'A general, who died on the battle-fields of his
country! "Le fils d'un boyard et d'un brave, pardessus le marche. J'aime
les boyards. M'aimes-tu, petit?' To this keen question I replied as
keenly, 'The Russian heart can recognize a great man even in the bitter
enemy of his country.' At least, I don't remember the exact words,
you know, but the idea was as I say. Napoleon was struck; he thought
a minute and then said to his suite: 'I like that boy's pride; if all
Russians think like this child', then he didn't finish, but went on and
entered the palace. I instantly mixed with his suite, and followed him.
I was already in high favour. I remember when he came into the first
hall, the emperor stopped before a portrait of the Empress Katherine,
and after a thoughtful glance remarked, 'That was a great woman,' and
passed on.

"Well, in a couple of days I was known all over the palace and the
Kremlin as 'le petit boyard.' I only went home to sleep. They were
nearly out of their minds about me at home. A couple of days after this,
Napoleon's page, De Bazancour, died; he had not been able to stand the
trials of the campaign. Napoleon remembered me; I was taken away without
explanation; the dead page's uniform was tried on me, and when I was
taken before the emperor, dressed in it, he nodded his head to me, and I
was told that I was appointed to the vacant post of page.

"Well, I was glad enough, for I had long felt the greatest sympathy for
this man; and then the pretty uniform and all that--only a child, you
know--and so on. It was a dark green dress coat with gold buttons--red
facings, white trousers, and a white silk waistcoat--silk stockings,
shoes with buckles, and top-boots if I were riding out with his majesty
or with the suite.

"Though the position of all of us at that time was not particularly
brilliant, and the poverty was dreadful all round, yet the etiquette at
court was strictly preserved, and the more strictly in proportion to the
growth of the forebodings of disaster."

"Quite so, quite so, of course!" murmured the poor prince, who didn't
know where to look. "Your memoirs would be most interesting."

The general was, of course, repeating what he had told Lebedeff the
night before, and thus brought it out glibly enough, but here he looked
suspiciously at the prince out of the corners of his eyes.

"My memoirs!" he began, with redoubled pride and dignity. "Write my
memoirs? The idea has not tempted me. And yet, if you please, my memoirs
have long been written, but they shall not see the light until dust
returns to dust. Then, I doubt not, they will be translated into all
languages, not of course on account of their actual literary merit, but
because of the great events of which I was the actual witness, though
but a child at the time. As a child, I was able to penetrate into the
secrecy of the great man's private room. At nights I have heard the
groans and wailings of this 'giant in distress.' He could feel no shame
in weeping before such a mere child as I was, though I understood even
then that the reason for his suffering was the silence of the Emperor
Alexander."

"Yes, of course; he had written letters to the latter with proposals of
peace, had he not?" put in the prince.

"We did not know the details of his proposals, but he wrote letter after
letter, all day and every day. He was dreadfully agitated. Sometimes at
night I would throw myself upon his breast with tears (Oh, how I
loved that man!). 'Ask forgiveness, Oh, ask forgiveness of the Emperor
Alexander!' I would cry. I should have said, of course, 'Make peace
with Alexander,' but as a child I expressed my idea in the naive way
recorded. 'Oh, my child,' he would say (he loved to talk to me and
seemed to forget my tender years), 'Oh, my child, I am ready to kiss
Alexander's feet, but I hate and abominate the King of Prussia and the
Austrian Emperor, and--and--but you know nothing of politics, my child.'
He would pull up, remembering whom he was speaking to, but his eyes
would sparkle for a long while after this. Well now, if I were to
describe all this, and I have seen greater events than these, all these
critical gentlemen of the press and political parties--Oh, no thanks!
I'm their very humble servant, but no thanks!"

"Quite so--parties--you are very right," said the prince. "I was reading
a book about Napoleon and the Waterloo campaign only the other day, by
Charasse, in which the author does not attempt to conceal his joy at
Napoleon's discomfiture at every page. Well now, I don't like that;
it smells of 'party,' you know. You are quite right. And were you much
occupied with your service under Napoleon?"

The general was in ecstasies, for the prince's remarks, made, as they
evidently were, in all seriousness and simplicity, quite dissipated the
last relics of his suspicion.

"I know Charasse's book! Oh! I was so angry with his work! I wrote to
him and said--I forget what, at this moment. You ask whether I was very
busy under the Emperor? Oh no! I was called 'page,' but hardly took my
duty seriously. Besides, Napoleon very soon lost hope of conciliating
the Russians, and he would have forgotten all about me had he not loved
me--for personal reasons--I don't mind saying so now. My heart was
greatly drawn to him, too. My duties were light. I merely had to be at
the palace occasionally to escort the Emperor out riding, and that
was about all. I rode very fairly well. He used to have a ride before
dinner, and his suite on those occasions were generally Davoust, myself,
and Roustan."

"Constant?" said the prince, suddenly, and quite involuntarily.

"No; Constant was away then, taking a letter to the Empress Josephine.
Instead of him there were always a couple of orderlies--and that was
all, excepting, of course, the generals and marshals whom Napoleon
always took with him for the inspection of various localities, and
for the sake of consultation generally. I remember there was
one--Davoust--nearly always with him--a big man with spectacles. They
used to argue and quarrel sometimes. Once they were in the Emperor's
study together--just those two and myself--I was unobserved--and
they argued, and the Emperor seemed to be agreeing to something under
protest. Suddenly his eye fell on me and an idea seemed to flash across
him.

"'Child,' he said, abruptly. 'If I were to recognize the Russian
orthodox religion and emancipate the serfs, do you think Russia would
come over to me?'"

"'Never!' I cried, indignantly."

"The Emperor was much struck."

"'In the flashing eyes of this patriotic child I read and accept the
fiat of the Russian people. Enough, Davoust, it is mere phantasy on our
part. Come, let's hear your other project.'"

"'Yes, but that was a great idea," said the prince, clearly interested.
"You ascribe it to Davoust, do you?"

"Well, at all events, they were consulting together at the time. Of
course it was the idea of an eagle, and must have originated with
Napoleon; but the other project was good too--it was the 'Conseil du
lion!' as Napoleon called it. This project consisted in a proposal
to occupy the Kremlin with the whole army; to arm and fortify it
scientifically, to kill as many horses as could be got, and salt their
flesh, and spend the winter there; and in spring to fight their way out.
Napoleon liked the idea--it attracted him. We rode round the Kremlin
walls every day, and Napoleon used to give orders where they were to be
patched, where built up, where pulled down and so on. All was decided at
last. They were alone together--those two and myself.

"Napoleon was walking up and down with folded arms. I could not take my
eyes off his face--my heart beat loudly and painfully.

"'I'm off,' said Davoust. 'Where to?' asked Napoleon.

"'To salt horse-flesh,' said Davoust. Napoleon shuddered--his fate was
being decided.

"'Child,' he addressed me suddenly, 'what do you think of our plan?' Of
course he only applied to me as a sort of toss-up, you know. I turned to
Davoust and addressed my reply to him. I said, as though inspired:

"'Escape, general! Go home!--'

"The project was abandoned; Davoust shrugged his shoulders and went out,
whispering to himself--'Bah, il devient superstitieux!' Next morning the
order to retreat was given."

"All this is most interesting," said the prince, very softly, "if it
really was so--that is, I mean--" he hastened to correct himself.

"Oh, my dear prince," cried the general, who was now so intoxicated with
his own narrative that he probably could not have pulled up at the most
patent indiscretion.

"You say, if it really was so!' There was more--much more, I assure
you! These are merely a few little political acts. I tell you I was the
eye-witness of the nightly sorrow and groanings of the great man, and
of that no one can speak but myself. Towards the end he wept no more,
though he continued to emit an occasional groan; but his face grew more
overcast day by day, as though Eternity were wrapping its gloomy mantle
about him. Occasionally we passed whole hours of silence together at
night, Roustan snoring in the next room--that fellow slept like a pig.
'But he's loyal to me and my dynasty,' said Napoleon of him.

"Sometimes it was very painful to me, and once he caught me with tears
in my eyes. He looked at me kindly. 'You are sorry for me,' he said,
'you, my child, and perhaps one other child--my son, the King of
Rome--may grieve for me. All the rest hate me; and my brothers are the
first to betray me in misfortune.' I sobbed and threw myself into his
arms. He could not resist me--he burst into tears, and our tears mingled
as we folded each other in a close embrace.

"'Write, oh, write a letter to the Empress Josephine!' I cried, sobbing.
Napoleon started, reflected, and said, 'You remind me of a third heart
which loves me. Thank you, my friend;' and then and there he sat down
and wrote that letter to Josephine, with which Constant was sent off
next day."

"You did a good action," said the prince, "for in the midst of his angry
feelings you insinuated a kind thought into his heart."

"Just so, prince, just so. How well you bring out that fact! Because
your own heart is good!" cried the ecstatic old gentleman, and,
strangely enough, real tears glistened in his eyes. "Yes, prince, it was
a wonderful spectacle. And, do you know, I all but went off to Paris,
and should assuredly have shared his solitary exile with him; but, alas,
our destinies were otherwise ordered! We parted, he to his island,
where I am sure he thought of the weeping child who had embraced him
so affectionately at parting in Moscow; and I was sent off to the cadet
corps, where I found nothing but roughness and harsh discipline. Alas,
my happy days were done!"

"'I do not wish to deprive your mother of you, and, therefore, I will
not ask you to go with me,' he said, the morning of his departure, 'but
I should like to do something for you.' He was mounting his horse as
he spoke. 'Write something in my sister's album for me,' I said rather
timidly, for he was in a state of great dejection at the moment. He
turned, called for a pen, took the album. 'How old is your sister?'
he asked, holding the pen in his hand. 'Three years old,' I said. 'Ah,
petite fille alors!' and he wrote in the album:

'Ne mentes jamais! NAPOLEON (votre ami sincere).'

"Such advice, and at such a moment, you must allow, prince, was--"

"Yes, quite so; very remarkable."

"This page of the album, framed in gold, hung on the wall of my sister's
drawing-room all her life, in the most conspicuous place, till the day
of her death; where it is now, I really don't know. Heavens! it's two
o'clock! _How_ I have kept you, prince! It is really most unpardonable of
me."

The general rose.

"Oh, not in the least," said the prince. "On the contrary, I have been
so much interested, I'm really very much obliged to you."

"Prince,", said the general, pressing his hand, and looking at him with
flashing eyes, and an expression as though he were under the influence
of a sudden thought which had come upon him with stunning force.
"Prince, you are so kind, so simple-minded, that sometimes I really
feel sorry for you! I gaze at you with a feeling of real affection. Oh,
Heaven bless you! May your life blossom and fructify in love. Mine is
over. Forgive me, forgive me!"

He left the room quickly, covering his face with his hands.

The prince could not doubt the sincerity of his agitation. He
understood, too, that the old man had left the room intoxicated with his
own success. The general belonged to that class of liars, who, in spite
of their transports of lying, invariably suspect that they are not
believed. On this occasion, when he recovered from his exaltation, he
would probably suspect Muishkin of pitying him, and feel insulted.

"Have I been acting rightly in allowing him to develop such vast
resources of imagination?" the prince asked himself. But his answer was
a fit of violent laughter which lasted ten whole minutes. He tried to
reproach himself for the laughing fit, but eventually concluded that he
needn't do so, since in spite of it he was truly sorry for the old man.
The same evening he received a strange letter, short but decided. The
general informed him that they must part for ever; that he was grateful,
but that even from him he could not accept "signs of sympathy which were
humiliating to the dignity of a man already miserable enough."

When the prince heard that the old man had gone to Nina Alexandrovna,
though, he felt almost easy on his account.

We have seen, however, that the general paid a visit to Lizabetha
Prokofievna and caused trouble there, the final upshot being that he
frightened Mrs. Epanchin, and angered her by bitter hints as to his son
Gania.

He had been turned out in disgrace, eventually, and this was the
cause of his bad night and quarrelsome day, which ended in his sudden
departure into the street in a condition approaching insanity, as
recorded before.

Colia did not understand the position. He tried severity with his
father, as they stood in the street after the latter had cursed the
household, hoping to bring him round that way.

"Well, where are we to go to now, father?" he asked. "You don't want
to go to the prince's; you have quarrelled with Lebedeff; you have no
money; I never have any; and here we are in the middle of the road, in a
nice sort of mess."

"Better to be of a mess than in a mess! I remember making a joke
something like that at the mess in eighteen hundred and forty--forty--I
forget. 'Where is my youth, where is my golden youth?' Who was it said
that, Colia?"

"It was Gogol, in Dead Souls, father," cried Colia, glancing at him in
some alarm.

"'Dead Souls,' yes, of course, dead. When I die, Colia, you must engrave
on my tomb:

"'Here lies a Dead Soul, Shame pursues me.'

"Who said that, Colia?"

"I don't know, father."

"There was no Eropegoff? Eroshka Eropegoff?" he cried, suddenly,
stopping in the road in a frenzy. "No Eropegoff! And my own son to say
it! Eropegoff was in the place of a brother to me for eleven months. I
fought a duel for him. He was married afterwards, and then killed on the
field of battle. The bullet struck the cross on my breast and glanced
off straight into his temple. 'I'll never forget you,' he cried, and
expired. I served my country well and honestly, Colia, but shame, shame
has pursued me! You and Nina will come to my grave, Colia; poor Nina,
I always used to call her Nina in the old days, and how she loved....
Nina, Nina, oh, Nina. What have I ever done to deserve your forgiveness
and long-suffering? Oh, Colia, your mother has an angelic spirit, an
angelic spirit, Colia!"

"I know that, father. Look here, dear old father, come back home! Let's
go back to mother. Look, she ran after us when we came out. What have
you stopped her for, just as though you didn't take in what I said? Why
are you crying, father?"

Poor Colia cried himself, and kissed the old man's hands

"You kiss my hands, MINE?"

"Yes, yes, yours, yours! What is there to surprise anyone in that? Come,
come, you mustn't go on like this, crying in the middle of the road; and
you a general too, a military man! Come, let's go back."

"God bless you, dear boy, for being respectful to a disgraced man. Yes,
to a poor disgraced old fellow, your father. You shall have such a son
yourself; le roi de Rome. Oh, curses on this house!"

"Come, come, what does all this mean?" cried Colia beside himself at
last. "What is it? What has happened to you? Why don't you wish to come
back home? Why have you gone out of your mind, like this?"

"I'll explain it, I'll explain all to you. Don't shout! You shall hear.
Le roi de Rome. Oh, I am sad, I am melancholy!

"'Nurse, where is your tomb?'"

"Who said that, Colia?"

"I don't know, I don't know who said it. Come home at once; come on!
I'll punch Gania's head myself, if you like--only come. Oh, where are
you off to again?" The general was dragging him away towards the door a
house near. He sat down on the step, still holding Colia by the hand.

"Bend down--bend down your ear. I'll tell you all--disgrace--bend down,
I'll tell you in your ear."

"What are you dreaming of?" said poor, frightened Colia, stooping down
towards the old man, all the same.

"Le roi de Rome," whispered the general, trembling all over.

"What? What DO you mean? What roi de Rome?"

"I-I," the general continued to whisper, clinging more and more
tightly to the boy's shoulder. "I--wish--to tell you--all--Maria--Maria
Petrovna--Su--Su--Su......."

Colia broke loose, seized his father by the shoulders, and stared into
his eyes with frenzied gaze. The old man had grown livid--his lips were
shaking, convulsions were passing over his features. Suddenly he leant
over and began to sink slowly into Colia's arms.

"He's got a stroke!" cried Colia, loudly, realizing what was the matter
at last.

V.

IN point of fact, Varia had rather exaggerated the certainty of her
news as to the prince's betrothal to Aglaya. Very likely, with the
perspicacity of her sex, she gave out as an accomplished fact what she
felt was pretty sure to become a fact in a few days. Perhaps she could
not resist the satisfaction of pouring one last drop of bitterness into
her brother Gania's cup, in spite of her love for him. At all events,
she had been unable to obtain any definite news from the Epanchin
girls--the most she could get out of them being hints and surmises, and
so on. Perhaps Aglaya's sisters had merely been pumping Varia for news
while pretending to impart information; or perhaps, again, they had been
unable to resist the feminine gratification of teasing a friend--for,
after all this time, they could scarcely have helped divining the aim of
her frequent visits.

On the other hand, the prince, although he had told Lebedeff,--as we
know, that nothing had happened, and that he had nothing to impart,--the
prince may have been in error. Something strange seemed to have
happened, without anything definite having actually happened. Varia had
guessed that with her true feminine instinct.

How or why it came about that everyone at the Epanchins' became imbued
with one conviction--that something very important had happened to
Aglaya, and that her fate was in process of settlement--it would be very
difficult to explain. But no sooner had this idea taken root, than all
at once declared that they had seen and observed it long ago; that they
had remarked it at the time of the "poor knight" joke, and even before,
though they had been unwilling to believe in such nonsense.

So said the sisters. Of course, Lizabetha Prokofievna had foreseen it
long before the rest; her "heart had been sore" for a long while,
she declared, and it was now so sore that she appeared to be quite
overwhelmed, and the very thought of the prince became distasteful to
her.

There was a question to be decided--most important, but most difficult;
so much so, that Mrs. Epanchin did not even see how to put it into
words. Would the prince do or not? Was all this good or bad? If good
(which might be the case, of course), WHY good? If bad (which was
hardly doubtful), WHEREIN, especially, bad? Even the general, the
paterfamilias, though astonished at first, suddenly declared that, "upon
his honour, he really believed he had fancied something of the kind,
after all. At first, it seemed a new idea, and then, somehow, it looked
as familiar as possible." His wife frowned him down there. This was
in the morning; but in the evening, alone with his wife, he had given
tongue again.

"Well, really, you know"--(silence)--"of course, you know all this is
very strange, if true, which I cannot deny; but"--(silence).--"But,
on the other hand, if one looks things in the face, you know--upon my
honour, the prince is a rare good fellow--and--and--and--well, his name,
you know--your family name--all this looks well, and perpetuates the
name and title and all that--which at this moment is not standing so
high as it might--from one point of view--don't you know? The world,
the world is the world, of course--and people will talk--and--and--the
prince has property, you know--if it is not very large--and then
he--he--" (Continued silence, and collapse of the general.)

Hearing these words from her husband, Lizabetha Prokofievna was driven
beside herself.

According to her opinion, the whole thing had been one huge,
fantastical, absurd, unpardonable mistake. "First of all, this prince is
an idiot, and, secondly, he is a fool--knows nothing of the world, and
