has no place in it. Whom can he be shown to? Where can you take him to?
What will old Bielokonski say? We never thought of such a husband as
THAT for our Aglaya!"

Of course, the last argument was the chief one. The maternal heart
trembled with indignation to think of such an absurdity, although in
that heart there rose another voice, which said: "And WHY is not the
prince such a husband as you would have desired for Aglaya?" It was this
voice which annoyed Lizabetha Prokofievna more than anything else.

For some reason or other, the sisters liked the idea of the prince. They
did not even consider it very strange; in a word, they might be expected
at any moment to range themselves strongly on his side. But both of them
decided to say nothing either way. It had always been noticed in the
family that the stronger Mrs. Epanchin's opposition was to any project,
the nearer she was, in reality, to giving in.

Alexandra, however, found it difficult to keep absolute silence on
the subject. Long since holding, as she did, the post of "confidential
adviser to mamma," she was now perpetually called in council, and asked
her opinion, and especially her assistance, in order to recollect "how
on earth all this happened?" Why did no one see it? Why did no one say
anything about it? What did all that wretched "poor knight" joke mean?
Why was she, Lizabetha Prokofievna, driven to think, and foresee, and
worry for everybody, while they all sucked their thumbs, and counted the
crows in the garden, and did nothing? At first, Alexandra had been very
careful, and had merely replied that perhaps her father's remark was not
so far out: that, in the eyes of the world, probably the choice of the
prince as a husband for one of the Epanchin girls would be considered a
very wise one. Warming up, however, she added that the prince was by no
means a fool, and never had been; and that as to "place in the world,"
no one knew what the position of a respectable person in Russia would
imply in a few years--whether it would depend on successes in the
government service, on the old system, or what.

To all this her mother replied that Alexandra was a freethinker, and
that all this was due to that "cursed woman's rights question."

Half an hour after this conversation, she went off to town, and thence
to the Kammenny Ostrof, ["Stone Island," a suburb and park of St.
Petersburg] to see Princess Bielokonski, who had just arrived from
Moscow on a short visit. The princess was Aglaya's godmother.

"Old Bielokonski" listened to all the fevered and despairing lamentations
of Lizabetha Prokofievna without the least emotion; the tears of this
sorrowful mother did not evoke answering sighs--in fact, she laughed at
her. She was a dreadful old despot, this princess; she could not allow
equality in anything, not even in friendship of the oldest standing, and
she insisted on treating Mrs. Epanchin as her protegee, as she had been
thirty-five years ago. She could never put up with the independence and
energy of Lizabetha's character. She observed that, as usual, the whole
family had gone much too far ahead, and had converted a fly into an
elephant; that, so far as she had heard their story, she was persuaded
that nothing of any seriousness had occurred; that it would surely
be better to wait until something _did_ happen; that the prince, in
her opinion, was a very decent young fellow, though perhaps a little
eccentric, through illness, and not quite as weighty in the world as one
could wish. The worst feature was, she said, Nastasia Philipovna.

Lizabetha Prokofievna well understood that the old lady was angry at the
failure of Evgenie Pavlovitch--her own recommendation. She returned
home to Pavlofsk in a worse humour than when she left, and of course
everybody in the house suffered. She pitched into everyone, because, she
declared, they had 'gone mad.' Why were things always mismanaged in her
house? Why had everybody been in such a frantic hurry in this matter?
So far as she could see, nothing whatever had happened. Surely they had
better wait and see what was to happen, instead of making mountains out
of molehills.

And so the conclusion of the matter was that it would be far better to
take it quietly, and wait coolly to see what would turn up. But, alas!
peace did not reign for more than ten minutes. The first blow dealt to
its power was in certain news communicated to Lizabetha Prokofievna as
to events which bad happened during her trip to see the princess. (This
trip had taken place the day after that on which the prince had turned
up at the Epanchins at nearly one o'clock at night, thinking it was
nine.)

The sisters replied candidly and fully enough to their mother's
impatient questions on her return. They said, in the first place, that
nothing particular had happened since her departure; that the prince
had been, and that Aglaya had kept him waiting a long while before
she appeared--half an hour, at least; that she had then come in, and
immediately asked the prince to have a game of chess; that the prince
did not know the game, and Aglaya had beaten him easily; that she had
been in a wonderfully merry mood, and had laughed at the prince, and
chaffed him so unmercifully that one was quite sorry to see his wretched
expression.

She had then asked him to play cards--the game called "little fools."
At this game the tables were turned completely, for the prince had shown
himself a master at it. Aglaya had cheated and changed cards, and stolen
others, in the most bare-faced way, but, in spite of everything the
prince had beaten her hopelessly five times running, and she had been
left "little fool" each time.

Aglaya then lost her temper, and began to say such awful things to the
prince that he laughed no more, but grew dreadfully pale, especially
when she said that she should not remain in the house with him, and that
he ought to be ashamed of coming to their house at all, especially at
night, "AFTER ALL THAT HAD HAPPENED."

So saying, she had left the room, banging the door after her, and the
prince went off, looking as though he were on his way to a funeral, in
spite of all their attempts at consolation.

Suddenly, a quarter of an hour after the prince's departure, Aglaya had
rushed out of her room in such a hurry that she had not even wiped her
eyes, which were full of tears. She came back because Colia had brought
a hedgehog. Everybody came in to see the hedgehog. In answer to their
questions Colia explained that the hedgehog was not his, and that he had
left another boy, Kostia Lebedeff, waiting for him outside. Kostia was
too shy to come in, because he was carrying a hatchet; they had bought
the hedgehog and the hatchet from a peasant whom they had met on the
road. He had offered to sell them the hedgehog, and they had paid fifty
copecks for it; and the hatchet had so taken their fancy that they had
made up their minds to buy it of their own accord. On hearing this,
Aglaya urged Colia to sell her the hedgehog; she even called him "dear
Colia," in trying to coax him. He refused for a long time, but at last
he could hold out no more, and went to fetch Kostia Lebedeff. The latter
appeared, carrying his hatchet, and covered with confusion. Then it came
out that the hedgehog was not theirs, but the property of a schoolmate,
one Petroff, who had given them some money to buy Schlosser's History
for him, from another schoolfellow who at that moment was driven to
raising money by the sale of his books. Colia and Kostia were about to
make this purchase for their friend when chance brought the hedgehog
to their notice, and they had succumbed to the temptation of buying it.
They were now taking Petroff the hedgehog and hatchet which they had
bought with his money, instead of Schiosser's History. But Aglaya so
entreated them that at last they consented to sell her the hedgehog. As
soon as she had got possession of it, she put it in a wicker basket with
Colia's help, and covered it with a napkin. Then she said to Colia: "Go
and take this hedgehog to the prince from me, and ask him to accept it
as a token of my profound respect." Colia joyfully promised to do the
errand, but he demanded explanations. "What does the hedgehog mean? What
is the meaning of such a present?" Aglaya replied that it was none of
his business. "I am sure that there is some allegory about it," Colia
persisted. Aglaya grew angry, and called him "a silly boy." "If I did
not respect all women in your person," replied Colia, "and if my own
principles would permit it, I would soon prove to you, that I know how
to answer such an insult!" But, in the end, Colia went off with the
hedgehog in great delight, followed by Kostia Lebedeff. Aglaya's
annoyance was soon over, and seeing that Colia was swinging the
hedgehog's basket violently to and fro, she called out to him from the
verandah, as if they had never quarrelled: "Colia, dear, please take
care not to drop him!" Colia appeared to have no grudge against her,
either, for he stopped, and answered most cordially: "No, I will not
drop him! Don't be afraid, Aglaya Ivanovna!" After which he went on his
way. Aglaya burst out laughing and ran up to her room, highly delighted.
Her good spirits lasted the whole day.

All this filled poor Lizabetha's mind with chaotic confusion. What on
earth did it all mean? The most disturbing feature was the hedgehog.
What was the symbolic signification of a hedgehog? What did they
understand by it? What underlay it? Was it a cryptic message?

Poor General Epanchin "put his foot in it" by answering the above
questions in his own way. He said there was no cryptic message at
all. As for the hedgehog, it was just a hedgehog, which meant
nothing--unless, indeed, it was a pledge of friendship,--the sign of
forgetting of offences and so on. At all events, it was a joke, and, of
course, a most pardonable and innocent one.

We may as well remark that the general had guessed perfectly accurately.

The prince, returning home from the interview with Aglaya, had sat
gloomy and depressed for half an hour. He was almost in despair when
Colia arrived with the hedgehog.

Then the sky cleared in a moment. The prince seemed to arise from the
dead; he asked Colia all about it, made him repeat the story over and
over again, and laughed and shook hands with the boys in his delight.

It seemed clear to the prince that Aglaya forgave him, and that he might
go there again this very evening; and in his eyes that was not only the
main thing, but everything in the world.

"What children we are still, Colia!" he cried at last,
enthusiastically,--"and how delightful it is that we can be children
still!"

"Simply--my dear prince,--simply she is in love with you,--that's the
whole of the secret!" replied Colia, with authority.

The prince blushed, but this time he said nothing. Colia burst out
laughing and clapped his hands. A minute later the prince laughed too,
and from this moment until the evening he looked at his watch every
other minute to see how much time he had to wait before evening came.

But the situation was becoming rapidly critical.

Mrs. Epanchin could bear her suspense no longer, and in spite of the
opposition of husband and daughters, she sent for Aglaya, determined to
get a straightforward answer out of her, once for all.

"Otherwise," she observed hysterically, "I shall die before evening."

It was only now that everyone realized to what a ridiculous dead-lock
the whole matter had been brought. Excepting feigned surprise,
indignation, laughter, and jeering--both at the prince and at everyone
who asked her questions,--nothing could be got out of Aglaya.

Lizabetha Prokofievna went to bed and only rose again in time for tea,
when the prince might be expected.

She awaited him in trembling agitation; and when he at last arrived she
nearly went off into hysterics.

Muishkin himself came in very timidly. He seemed to feel his way, and
looked in each person's eyes in a questioning way,--for Aglaya was
absent, which fact alarmed him at once.

This evening there were no strangers present--no one but the immediate
members of the family. Prince S. was still in town, occupied with the
affairs of Evgenie Pavlovitch's uncle.

"I wish at least HE would come and say something!" complained poor
Lizabetha Prokofievna.

The general sat still with a most preoccupied air. The sisters were
looking very serious and did not speak a word, and Lizabetha Prokofievna
did not know how to commence the conversation.

At length she plunged into an energetic and hostile criticism of
railways, and glared at the prince defiantly.

Alas Aglaya still did not come--and the prince was quite lost. He had
the greatest difficulty in expressing his opinion that railways were
most useful institutions,--and in the middle of his speech Adelaida
laughed, which threw him into a still worse state of confusion.

At this moment in marched Aglaya, as calm and collected as could be.
She gave the prince a ceremonious bow and solemnly took up a
prominent position near the big round table. She looked at the prince
questioningly.

All present realized that the moment for the settlement of perplexities
had arrived.

"Did you get my hedgehog?" she inquired, firmly and almost angrily.

"Yes, I got it," said the prince, blushing.

"Tell us now, at once, what you made of the present? I must have you
answer this question for mother's sake; she needs pacifying, and so do
all the rest of the family!"

"Look here, Aglaya--" began the general.

"This--this is going beyond all limits!" said Lizabetha Prokofievna,
suddenly alarmed.

"It is not in the least beyond all limits, mamma!" said her daughter,
firmly. "I sent the prince a hedgehog this morning, and I wish to hear
his opinion of it. Go on, prince."

"What--what sort of opinion, Aglaya Ivanovna?"

"About the hedgehog."

"That is--I suppose you wish to know how I received the hedgehog, Aglaya
Ivanovna,--or, I should say, how I regarded your sending him to me? In
that case, I may tell you--in a word--that I--in fact--"

He paused, breathless.

"Come--you haven't told us much!" said Aglaya, after waiting some five
seconds. "Very well, I am ready to drop the hedgehog, if you like; but
I am anxious to be able to clear up this accumulation of
misunderstandings. Allow me to ask you, prince,--I wish to hear from
you, personally--are you making me an offer, or not?"

"Gracious heavens!" exclaimed Lizabetha Prokofievna. The prince started.
The general stiffened in his chair; the sisters frowned.

"Don't deceive me now, prince--tell the truth. All these people
persecute me with astounding questions--about you. Is there any ground
for all these questions, or not? Come!"

"I have not asked you to marry me yet, Aglaya Ivanovna," said the
prince, becoming suddenly animated; "but you know yourself how much I
love you and trust you."

"No--I asked you this--answer this! Do you intend to ask for my band, or
not?"

"Yes--I do ask for it!" said the prince, more dead than alive now.

There was a general stir in the room.

"No--no--my dear girl," began the general. "You cannot proceed like
this, Aglaya, if that's how the matter stands. It's impossible. Prince,
forgive it, my dear fellow, but--Lizabetha Prokofievna!"--he appealed to
his spouse for help--"you must really--"

"Not I--not I! I retire from all responsibility," said Lizabetha
Prokofievna, with a wave of the hand.

"Allow me to speak, please, mamma," said Aglaya. "I think I ought to
have something to say in the matter. An important moment of my destiny
is about to be decided"--(this is how Aglaya expressed herself)--"and
I wish to find out how the matter stands, for my own sake, though I am
glad you are all here. Allow me to ask you, prince, since you cherish
those intentions, how you consider that you will provide for my
happiness?"

"I--I don't quite know how to answer your question, Aglaya Ivanovna.
What is there to say to such a question? And--and must I answer?"

"I think you are rather overwhelmed and out of breath. Have a little
rest, and try to recover yourself. Take a glass of water, or--but
they'll give you some tea directly."

"I love you, Aglaya Ivanovna,--I love you very much. I love only
you--and--please don't jest about it, for I do love you very much."

"Well, this matter is important. We are not children--we must look into
it thoroughly. Now then, kindly tell me--what does your fortune consist
of?"

"No--Aglaya--come, enough of this, you mustn't behave like this," said
her father, in dismay.

"It's disgraceful," said Lizabetha Prokofievna in a loud whisper.

"She's mad--quite!" said Alexandra.

"Fortune--money--do you mean?" asked the prince in some surprise.

"Just so."

"I have now--let's see--I have a hundred and thirty-five thousand
roubles," said the prince, blushing violently.

"Is that all, really?" said Aglaya, candidly, without the slightest
show of confusion. "However, it's not so bad, especially if managed with
economy. Do you intend to serve?"

"I--I intended to try for a certificate as private tutor."

"Very good. That would increase our income nicely. Have you any
intention of being a Kammer-junker?"

"A Kammer-junker? I had not thought of it, but--"

But here the two sisters could restrain themselves no longer, and both
of them burst into irrepressible laughter.

Adelaida had long since detected in Aglaya's features the gathering
signs of an approaching storm of laughter, which she restrained with
amazing self-control.

Aglaya looked menacingly at her laughing sisters, but could not contain
herself any longer, and the next minute she too had burst into an
irrepressible, and almost hysterical, fit of mirth. At length she jumped
up, and ran out of the room.

"I knew it was all a joke!" cried Adelaida. "I felt it ever since--since
the hedgehog."

"No, no! I cannot allow this,--this is a little too much," cried
Lizabetha Prokofievna, exploding with rage, and she rose from her seat
and followed Aglaya out of the room as quickly as she could.

The two sisters hurriedly went after her.

The prince and the general were the only two persons left in the room.

"It's--it's really--now could you have imagined anything like it, Lef
Nicolaievitch?" cried the general. He was evidently so much agitated
that he hardly knew what he wished to say. "Seriously now, seriously I
mean--"

"I only see that Aglaya Ivanovna is laughing at me," said the poor
prince, sadly.

"Wait a bit, my boy, I'll just go--you stay here, you know. But do just
explain, if you can, Lef Nicolaievitch, how in the world has all this
come about? And what does it all mean? You must understand, my dear
fellow; I am a father, you see, and I ought to be allowed to understand
the matter--do explain, I beg you!"

"I love Aglaya Ivanovna--she knows it,--and I think she must have long
known it."

The general shrugged his shoulders.

"Strange--it's strange," he said, "and you love her very much?"

"Yes, very much."

"Well--it's all most strange to me. That is--my dear fellow, it is
such a surprise--such a blow--that... You see, it is not your financial
position (though I should not object if you were a bit richer)--I am
thinking of my daughter's happiness, of course, and the thing is--are
you able to give her the happiness she deserves? And then--is all this
a joke on her part, or is she in earnest? I don't mean on your side, but
on hers."

At this moment Alexandra's voice was heard outside the door, calling out
"Papa!"

"Wait for me here, my boy--will you? Just wait and think it all over,
and I'll come back directly," he said hurriedly, and made off with what
looked like the rapidity of alarm in response to Alexandra's call.

He found the mother and daughter locked in one another's arms, mingling
their tears.

These were the tears of joy and peace and reconciliation. Aglaya was
kissing her mother's lips and cheeks and hands; they were hugging each
other in the most ardent way.

"There, look at her now--Ivan Fedorovitch! Here she is--all of her! This
is our REAL Aglaya at last!" said Lizabetha Prokofievna.

Aglaya raised her happy, tearful face from her mother's breast, glanced
at her father, and burst out laughing. She sprang at him and hugged him
too, and kissed him over and over again. She then rushed back to her
mother and hid her face in the maternal bosom, and there indulged in
more tears. Her mother covered her with a corner of her shawl.

"Oh, you cruel little girl! How will you treat us all next, I wonder?"
she said, but she spoke with a ring of joy in her voice, and as though
she breathed at last without the oppression which she had felt so long.

"Cruel?" sobbed Aglaya. "Yes, I AM cruel, and worthless, and
spoiled--tell father so,--oh, here he is--I forgot Father, listen!" She
laughed through her tears.

"My darling, my little idol," cried the general, kissing and fondling
her hands (Aglaya did not draw them away); "so you love this young man,
do you?"

"No, no, no, can't BEAR him, I can't BEAR your young man!" cried
Aglaya, raising her head. "And if you dare say that ONCE more, papa--I'm
serious, you know, I'm,--do you hear me--I'm serious!"

She certainly did seem to be serious enough. She had flushed up all over
and her eyes were blazing.

The general felt troubled and remained silent, while Lizabetha
Prokofievna telegraphed to him from behind Aglaya to ask no questions.

"If that's the case, darling--then, of course, you shall do exactly as
you like. He is waiting alone downstairs. Hadn't I better hint to him
gently that he can go?" The general telegraphed to Lizabetha Prokofievna
in his turn.

"No, no, you needn't do anything of the sort; you mustn't hint gently
at all. I'll go down myself directly. I wish to apologize to this young
man, because I hurt his feelings."

"Yes, SERIOUSLY," said the general, gravely.

"Well, you'd better stay here, all of you, for a little, and I'll go
down to him alone to begin with. I'll just go in and then you can follow
me almost at once. That's the best way."

She had almost reached the door when she turned round again.

"I shall laugh--I know I shall; I shall die of laughing," she said,
lugubriously.

However, she turned and ran down to the prince as fast as her feet could
carry her.

"Well, what does it all mean? What do you make of it?" asked the general
of his spouse, hurriedly.

"I hardly dare say," said Lizabetha, as hurriedly, "but I think it's as
plain as anything can be."

"I think so too, as clear as day; she loves him."

"Loves him? She is head over ears in love, that's what she is," put in
Alexandra.

"Well, God bless her, God bless her, if such is her destiny," said
Lizabetha, crossing herself devoutly.

"H'm destiny it is," said the general, "and there's no getting out of
destiny."

With these words they all moved off towards the drawing-room, where
another surprise awaited them. Aglaya had not only not laughed, as she
had feared, but had gone to the prince rather timidly, and said to him:

"Forgive a silly, horrid, spoilt girl"--(she took his hand here)--"and
be quite assured that we all of us esteem you beyond all words. And if I
dared to turn your beautiful, admirable simplicity to ridicule, forgive
me as you would a little child its mischief. Forgive me all my absurdity
of just now, which, of course, meant nothing, and could not have the
slightest consequence." She spoke these words with great emphasis.

Her father, mother, and sisters came into the room and were much struck
with the last words, which they just caught as they entered--"absurdity
which of course meant nothing"--and still more so with the emphasis with
which Aglaya had spoken.

They exchanged glances questioningly, but the prince did not seem to
have understood the meaning of Aglaya's words; he was in the highest
heaven of delight.

"Why do you speak so?" he murmured. "Why do you ask my forgiveness?"

He wished to add that he was unworthy of being asked for forgiveness
by her, but paused. Perhaps he did understand Aglaya's sentence about
"absurdity which meant nothing," and like the strange fellow that he
was, rejoiced in the words.

Undoubtedly the fact that he might now come and see Aglaya as much as
he pleased again was quite enough to make him perfectly happy; that he
might come and speak to her, and see her, and sit by her, and walk with
her--who knows, but that all this was quite enough to satisfy him for
the whole of his life, and that he would desire no more to the end of
time?

(Lizabetha Prokofievna felt that this might be the case, and she didn't
like it; though very probably she could not have put the idea into
words.)

It would be difficult to describe the animation and high spirits which
distinguished the prince for the rest of the evening.

He was so happy that "it made one feel happy to look at him," as
Aglaya's sisters expressed it afterwards. He talked, and told stories
just as he had done once before, and never since, namely on the very
first morning of his acquaintance with the Epanchins, six months ago.
Since his return to Petersburg from Moscow, he had been remarkably
silent, and had told Prince S. on one occasion, before everyone, that he
did not think himself justified in degrading any thought by his unworthy
words.

But this evening he did nearly all the talking himself, and told stories
by the dozen, while he answered all questions put to him clearly,
gladly, and with any amount of detail.

There was nothing, however, of love-making in his talk. His ideas were
all of the most serious kind; some were even mystical and profound.

He aired his own views on various matters, some of his most private
opinions and observations, many of which would have seemed rather funny,
so his hearers agreed afterwards, had they not been so well expressed.

The general liked serious subjects of conversation; but both he and
Lizabetha Prokofievna felt that they were having a little too much of a
good thing tonight, and as the evening advanced, they both grew more
or less melancholy; but towards night, the prince fell to telling funny
stories, and was always the first to burst out laughing himself, which
he invariably did so joyously and simply that the rest laughed just as
much at him as at his stories.

As for Aglaya, she hardly said a word all the evening; but she listened
with all her ears to Lef Nicolaievitch's talk, and scarcely took her
eyes off him.

"She looked at him, and stared and stared, and hung on every word he
said," said Lizabetha afterwards, to her husband, "and yet, tell her
that she loves him, and she is furious!"

"What's to be done? It's fate," said the general, shrugging his
shoulders, and, for a long while after, he continued to repeat: "It's
fate, it's fate!"

We may add that to a business man like General Epanchin the present
position of affairs was most unsatisfactory. He hated the uncertainty in
which they had been, perforce, left. However, he decided to say no
more about it, and merely to look on, and take his time and tune from
Lizabetha Prokofievna.

The happy state in which the family had spent the evening, as just
recorded, was not of very long duration. Next day Aglaya quarrelled with
the prince again, and so she continued to behave for the next few days.
For whole hours at a time she ridiculed and chaffed the wretched man,
and made him almost a laughing-stock.

It is true that they used to sit in the little summer-house together for
an hour or two at a time, very often, but it was observed that on
these occasions the prince would read the paper, or some book, aloud to
Aglaya.

"Do you know," Aglaya said to him once, interrupting the reading, "I've
remarked that you are dreadfully badly educated. You never know anything
thoroughly, if one asks you; neither anyone's name, nor dates, nor about
treaties and so on. It's a great pity, you know!"

"I told you I had not had much of an education," replied the prince.

"How am I to respect you, if that's the case? Read on now. No--don't!
Stop reading!"

And once more, that same evening, Aglaya mystified them all. Prince S.
had returned, and Aglaya was particularly amiable to him, and asked a
great deal after Evgenie Pavlovitch. (Muishkin had not come in as yet.)

Suddenly Prince S. hinted something about "a new and approaching
change in the family." He was led to this remark by a communication
inadvertently made to him by Lizabetha Prokofievna, that Adelaida's
marriage must be postponed a little longer, in order that the two
weddings might come off together.

It is impossible to describe Aglaya's irritation. She flared up, and
said some indignant words about "all these silly insinuations."
She added that "she had no intentions as yet of replacing anybody's
mistress."

These words painfully impressed the whole party; but especially her
parents. Lizabetha Prokofievna summoned a secret council of two, and
insisted upon the general's demanding from the prince a full explanation
of his relations with Nastasia Philipovna. The general argued that it
was only a whim of Aglaya's; and that, had not Prince S. unfortunately
made that remark, which had confused the child and made her blush, she
never would have said what she did; and that he was sure Aglaya knew
well that anything she might have heard of the prince and Nastasia
Philipovna was merely the fabrication of malicious tongues, and that
the woman was going to marry Rogojin. He insisted that the prince had
nothing whatever to do with Nastasia Philipovna, so far as any liaison
was concerned; and, if the truth were to be told about it, he added,
never had had.

Meanwhile nothing put the prince out, and he continued to be in the
seventh heaven of bliss. Of course he could not fail to observe some
impatience and ill-temper in Aglaya now and then; but he believed in
something else, and nothing could now shake his conviction. Besides,
Aglaya's frowns never lasted long; they disappeared of themselves.

Perhaps he was too easy in his mind. So thought Hippolyte, at all
events, who met him in the park one day.

"Didn't I tell you the truth now, when I said you were in love?" he
said, coming up to Muishkin of his own accord, and stopping him.

The prince gave him his hand and congratulated him upon "looking so
well."

Hippolyte himself seemed to be hopeful about his state of health, as is
often the case with consumptives.

He had approached the prince with the intention of talking sarcastically
about his happy expression of face, but very soon forgot his intention
and began to talk about himself. He began complaining about everything,
disconnectedly and endlessly, as was his wont.

"You wouldn't believe," he concluded, "how irritating they all are
there. They are such wretchedly small, vain, egotistical, COMMONPLACE
people! Would you believe it, they invited me there under the express
condition that I should die quickly, and they are all as wild as
possible with me for not having died yet, and for being, on the
contrary, a good deal better! Isn't it a comedy? I don't mind betting
that you don't believe me!"

The prince said nothing.

"I sometimes think of coming over to you again," said Hippolyte,
carelessly. "So you DON'T think them capable of inviting a man on the
condition that he is to look sharp and die?"

"I certainly thought they invited you with quite other views."

"Ho, ho! you are not nearly so simple as they try to make you out! This
is not the time for it, or I would tell you a thing or two about that
beauty, Gania, and his hopes. You are being undermined, pitilessly
undermined, and--and it is really melancholy to see you so calm about
it. But alas! it's your nature--you can't help it!"

"My word! what a thing to be melancholy about! Why, do you think I
should be any happier if I were to feel disturbed about the excavations
you tell me of?"

"It is better to be unhappy and know the worst, than to be happy in a
fool's paradise! I suppose you don't believe that you have a rival in
that quarter?"

"Your insinuations as to rivalry are rather cynical, Hippolyte. I'm
sorry to say I have no right to answer you! As for Gania, I put it to
you, CAN any man have a happy mind after passing through what he has had
to suffer? I think that is the best way to look at it. He will
change yet, he has lots of time before him, and life is rich;
besides--besides..." the prince hesitated. "As to being undermined, I
don't know what in the world you are driving at, Hippolyte. I think we
had better drop the subject!"

"Very well, we'll drop it for a while. You can't look at anything but
in your exalted, generous way. You must put out your finger and touch a
thing before you'll believe it, eh? Ha! ha! ha! I suppose you despise me
dreadfully, prince, eh? What do you think?"

"Why? Because you have suffered more than we have?"

"No; because I am unworthy of my sufferings, if you like!"

"Whoever CAN suffer is worthy to suffer, I should think. Aglaya Ivanovna
wished to see you, after she had read your confession, but--"

"She postponed the pleasure--I see--I quite understand!" said Hippolyte,
hurriedly, as though he wished to banish the subject. "I hear--they
tell me--that you read her all that nonsense aloud? Stupid @ bosh it
was--written in delirium. And I can't understand how anyone can be so
I won't say CRUEL, because the word would be humiliating to myself, but
we'll say childishly vain and revengeful, as to REPROACH me with this
confession, and use it as a weapon against me. Don't be afraid, I'm not
referring to yourself."

"Oh, but I'm sorry you repudiate the confession, Hippolyte--it is
sincere; and, do you know, even the absurd parts of it--and these are
many" (here Hippolyte frowned savagely) "are, as it were, redeemed by
suffering--for it must have cost you something to admit what you there
say--great torture, perhaps, for all I know. Your motive must have
been a very noble one all through. Whatever may have appeared to the
contrary, I give you my word, I see this more plainly every day. I do
not judge you; I merely say this to have it off my mind, and I am only
sorry that I did not say it all THEN--"

Hippolyte flushed hotly. He had thought at first that the prince
was "humbugging" him; but on looking at his face he saw that he was
absolutely serious, and had no thought of any deception. Hippolyte
beamed with gratification.

"And yet I must die," he said, and almost added: "a man like me @

"And imagine how that Gania annoys me! He has developed the idea--or
pretends to believe--that in all probability three or four others who
heard my confession will die before I do. There's an idea for you--and
all this by way of CONSOLING me! Ha! ha! ha! In the first place they
haven't died yet; and in the second, if they DID die--all of them--what
would be the satisfaction to me in that? He judges me by himself. But he
goes further, he actually pitches into me because, as he declares, 'any
decent fellow' would die quietly, and that 'all this' is mere egotism
on my part. He doesn't see what refinement of egotism it is on his own
part--and at the same time, what ox-like coarseness! Have you ever read
of the death of one Stepan Gleboff, in the eighteenth century? I read of
it yesterday by chance."

"Who was he?"

"He was impaled on a stake in the time of Peter."

"I know, I know! He lay there fifteen hours in the hard frost, and died
with the most extraordinary fortitude--I know--what of him?"

"Only that God gives that sort of dying to some, and not to others.
Perhaps you think, though, that I could not die like Gleboff?"

"Not at all!" said the prince, blushing. "I was only going to say that
you--not that you could not be like Gleboff--but that you would have
been more like--"

"I guess what you mean--I should be an Osterman, not a Gleboff--eh? Is
that what you meant?"

"What Osterman?" asked the prince in some surprise.

"Why, Osterman--the diplomatist. Peter's Osterman," muttered Hippolyte,
confused. There was a moment's pause of mutual confusion.

"Oh, no, no!" said the prince at last, "that was not what I was going to
say--oh no! I don't think you would ever have been like Osterman."

Hippolyte frowned gloomily.

"I'll tell you why I draw the conclusion," explained the prince,
evidently desirous of clearing up the matter a little. "Because, though
I often think over the men of those times, I cannot for the life of me
imagine them to be like ourselves. It really appears to me that they
were of another race altogether than ourselves of today. At that time
people seemed to stick so to one idea; now, they are more nervous, more
sensitive, more enlightened--people of two or three ideas at once--as
it were. The man of today is a broader man, so to speak--and I declare
I believe that is what prevents him from being so self-contained and
independent a being as his brother of those earlier days. Of course my
remark was only made under this impression, and not in the least--"

"I quite understand. You are trying to comfort me for the naiveness with
which you disagreed with me--eh? Ha! ha! ha! You are a regular
child, prince! However, I cannot help seeing that you always treat me
like--like a fragile china cup. Never mind, never mind, I'm not a bit
angry! At all events we have had a very funny talk. Do you know, all
things considered, I should like to be something better than Osterman!
I wouldn't take the trouble to rise from the dead to be an Osterman.
However, I see I must make arrangements to die soon, or I myself--.
Well--leave me now! Au revoir. Look here--before you go, just give me
your opinion: how do you think I ought to die, now? I mean--the best,
the most virtuous way? Tell me!"

"You should pass us by and forgive us our happiness," said the prince in
a low voice.

"Ha! ha! ha! I thought so. I thought I should hear something like
that. Well, you are--you really are--oh dear me! Eloquence, eloquence!
Good-bye!"

VI.

As to the evening party at the Epanchins' at which Princess Bielokonski
was to be present, Varia had reported with accuracy; though she had
perhaps expressed herself too strongly.

The thing was decided in a hurry and with a certain amount of quite
unnecessary excitement, doubtless because "nothing could be done in this
house like anywhere else."

The impatience of Lizabetha Prokofievna "to get things settled"
explained a good deal, as well as the anxiety of both parents for the
happiness of their beloved daughter. Besides, Princess Bielokonski was
going away soon, and they hoped that she would take an interest in
the prince. They were anxious that he should enter society under the
auspices of this lady, whose patronage was the best of recommendations
for any young man.

Even if there seems something strange about the match, the general and
his wife said to each other, the "world" will accept Aglaya's fiance
without any question if he is under the patronage of the princess. In
any case, the prince would have to be "shown" sooner or later; that is,
introduced into society, of which he had, so far, not the least idea.
Moreover, it was only a question of a small gathering of a few intimate
friends. Besides Princess Bielokonski, only one other lady was expected,
the wife of a high dignitary. Evgenie Pavlovitch, who was to escort the
princess, was the only young man.

Muishkin was told of the princess's visit three days beforehand, but
nothing was said to him about the party until the night before it was to
take place.

He could not help observing the excited and agitated condition of all
members of the family, and from certain hints dropped in conversation he
gathered that they were all anxious as to the impression he should
make upon the princess. But the Epanchins, one and all, believed that
Muishkin, in his simplicity of mind, was quite incapable of realizing
that they could be feeling any anxiety on his account, and for this
reason they all looked at him with dread and uneasiness.

In point of fact, he did attach marvellously little importance to the
approaching event. He was occupied with altogether different thoughts.
Aglaya was growing hourly more capricious and gloomy, and this
distressed him. When they told him that Evgenie Pavlovitch was expected,
he evinced great delight, and said that he had long wished to see
him--and somehow these words did not please anyone.

Aglaya left the room in a fit of irritation, and it was not until late
in the evening, past eleven, when the prince was taking his departure,
that she said a word or two to him, privately, as she accompanied him as
far as the front door.

"I should like you," she said, "not to come here tomorrow until evening,
when the guests are all assembled. You know there are to be guests,
don't you?"

She spoke impatiently and with severity; this was the first allusion she
had made to the party of tomorrow.

She hated the idea of it, everyone saw that; and she would probably
have liked to quarrel about it with her parents, but pride and modesty
prevented her from broaching the subject.

The prince jumped to the conclusion that Aglaya, too, was nervous about
him, and the impression he would make, and that she did not like to
admit her anxiety; and this thought alarmed him.

"Yes, I am invited," he replied.

She was evidently in difficulties as to how best to go on. "May I speak
of something serious to you, for once in my life?" she asked, angrily.
She was irritated at she knew not what, and could not restrain her
wrath.

"Of course you may; I am very glad to listen," replied Muishkin.

Aglaya was silent a moment and then began again with evident dislike of
her subject:

"I do not wish to quarrel with them about this; in some things they
won't be reasonable. I always did feel a loathing for the laws which
seem to guide mamma's conduct at times. I don't speak of father, for
he cannot be expected to be anything but what he is. Mother is a
noble-minded woman, I know; you try to suggest anything mean to her,
and you'll see! But she is such a slave to these miserable creatures! I
don't mean old Bielokonski alone. She is a contemptible old thing, but
she is able to twist people round her little finger, and I admire that
in her, at all events! How mean it all is, and how foolish! We were
always middle-class, thoroughly middle-class, people. Why should we
attempt to climb into the giddy heights of the fashionable world? My
sisters are all for it. It's Prince S. they have to thank for poisoning
their minds. Why are you so glad that Evgenie Pavlovitch is coming?"

"Listen to me, Aglaya," said the prince, "I do believe you are nervous
lest I shall make a fool of myself tomorrow at your party?"

"Nervous about you?" Aglaya blushed. "Why should I be nervous about
you? What would it matter to me if you were to make ever such a fool of
yourself? How can you say such a thing? What do you mean by 'making a
fool of yourself'? What a vulgar expression! I suppose you intend to
talk in that sort of way tomorrow evening? Look up a few more such
expressions in your dictionary; do, you'll make a grand effect! I'm
sorry that you seem to be able to come into a room as gracefully as you
do; where did you learn the art? Do you think you can drink a cup of tea
decently, when you know everybody is looking at you, on purpose to see
how you do it?"

"Yes, I think I can."

"Can you? I'm sorry for it then, for I should have had a good laugh at
you otherwise. Do break SOMETHING at least, in the drawing-room! Upset
the Chinese vase, won't you? It's a valuable one; DO break it. Mamma
values it, and she'll go out of her mind--it was a present. She'll cry
before everyone, you'll see! Wave your hand about, you know, as you
always do, and just smash it. Sit down near it on purpose."

"On the contrary, I shall sit as far from it as I can. Thanks for the
hint."

"Ha, ha! Then you are afraid you WILL wave your arms about! I wouldn't
mind betting that you'll talk about some lofty subject, something
serious and learned. How delightful, how tactful that will be!"

"I should think it would be very foolish indeed, unless it happened to
come in appropriately."

"Look here, once for all," cried Aglaya, boiling over, "if I hear you
talking about capital punishment, or the economical condition of
Russia, or about Beauty redeeming the world, or anything of that sort,
I'll--well, of course I shall laugh and seem very pleased, but I warn
you beforehand, don't look me in the face again! I'm serious now,
mind, this time I AM REALLY serious." She certainly did say this very
seriously, so much so, that she looked quite different from what she
usually was, and the prince could not help noticing the fact. She did
not seem to be joking in the slightest degree.

"Well, you've put me into such a fright that I shall certainly make
a fool of myself, and very likely break something too. I wasn't a bit
alarmed before, but now I'm as nervous as can be."

"Then don't speak at all. Sit still and don't talk."

"Oh, I can't do that, you know! I shall say something foolish out of
pure 'funk,' and break something for the same excellent reason; I know
I shall. Perhaps I shall slip and fall on the slippery floor; I've done
that before now, you know. I shall dream of it all night now. Why did
you say anything about it?"

Aglaya looked blackly at him.

"Do you know what, I had better not come at all tomorrow! I'll plead
sick-list and stay away," said the prince, with decision.

Aglaya stamped her foot, and grew quite pale with anger.

"Oh, my goodness! Just listen to that! 'Better not come,' when the party
is on purpose for him! Good Lord! What a delightful thing it is to have
to do with such a--such a stupid as you are!"

"Well, I'll come, I'll come," interrupted the prince, hastily, "and I'll
give you my word of honour that I will sit the whole evening and not say
a word."

"I believe that's the best thing you can do. You said you'd 'plead
sick-list' just now; where in the world do you get hold of such
expressions? Why do you talk to me like this? Are you trying to irritate
me, or what?"

"Forgive me, it's a schoolboy expression. I won't do it again. I know
quite well, I see it, that you are anxious on my account (now, don't be
angry), and it makes me very happy to see it. You wouldn't believe
how frightened I am of misbehaving somehow, and how glad I am of your
instructions. But all this panic is simply nonsense, you know, Aglaya! I
give you my word it is; I am so pleased that you are such a child, such
a dear good child. How CHARMING you can be if you like, Aglaya."

Aglaya wanted to be angry, of course, but suddenly some quite unexpected
feeling seized upon her heart, all in a moment.

"And you won't reproach me for all these rude words of mine--some
day--afterwards?" she asked, of a sudden.

"What an idea! Of course not. And what are you blushing for again? And
there comes that frown once more! You've taken to looking too gloomy
sometimes, Aglaya, much more than you used to. I know why it is."

"Be quiet, do be quiet!"

"No, no, I had much better speak out. I have long wished to say it, and
HAVE said it, but that's not enough, for you didn't believe me. Between
us two there stands a being who--"

"Be quiet, be quiet, be quiet, be quiet!" Aglaya struck in, suddenly,
seizing his hand in hers, and gazing at him almost in terror.

At this moment she was called by someone. She broke loose from him with
an air of relief and ran away.

The prince was in a fever all night. It was strange, but he had suffered
from fever for several nights in succession. On this particular night,
while in semi-delirium, he had an idea: what if on the morrow he were
to have a fit before everybody? The thought seemed to freeze his blood
within him. All night he fancied himself in some extraordinary society
of strange persons. The worst of it was that he was talking nonsense;
he knew that he ought not to speak at all, and yet he talked the whole
time; he seemed to be trying to persuade them all to something. Evgenie
and Hippolyte were among the guests, and appeared to be great friends.

He awoke towards nine o'clock with a headache, full of confused ideas
and strange impressions. For some reason or other he felt most anxious
to see Rogojin, to see and talk to him, but what he wished to say he
could not tell. Next, he determined to go and see Hippolyte. His mind
was in a confused state, so much so that the incidents of the morning
seemed to be imperfectly realized, though acutely felt.

One of these incidents was a visit from Lebedeff. Lebedeff came rather
early--before ten--but he was tipsy already. Though the prince was not
in an observant condition, yet he could not avoid seeing that for at
least three days--ever since General Ivolgin had left the house Lebedeff
had been behaving very badly. He looked untidy and dirty at all times
of the day, and it was said that he had begun to rage about in his own
house, and that his temper was very bad. As soon as he arrived this
morning, he began to hold forth, beating his breast and apparently
blaming himself for something.

"I've--I've had a reward for my meanness--I've had a slap in the face,"
he concluded, tragically.

"A slap in the face? From whom? And so early in the morning?"

"Early?" said Lebedeff, sarcastically. "Time counts for nothing, even in
physical chastisement; but my slap in the face was not physical, it was
moral."

He suddenly took a seat, very unceremoniously, and began his story. It
was very disconnected; the prince frowned, and wished he could get away;
but suddenly a few words struck him. He sat stiff with wonder--Lebedeff
said some extraordinary things.

In the first place he began about some letter; the name of Aglaya
Ivanovna came in. Then suddenly he broke off and began to accuse the
prince of something; he was apparently offended with him. At first he
declared that the prince had trusted him with his confidences as to "a
certain person" (Nastasia Philipovna), but that of late his friendship
had been thrust back into his bosom, and his innocent question as to
"approaching family changes" had been curtly put aside, which Lebedeff
declared, with tipsy tears, he could not bear; especially as he knew so
much already both from Rogojin and Nastasia Philipovna and her friend,
and from Varvara Ardalionovna, and even from Aglaya Ivanovna, through
his daughter Vera. "And who told Lizabetha Prokofievna something in
secret, by letter? Who told her all about the movements of a certain
person called Nastasia Philipovna? Who was the anonymous person, eh?
Tell me!"

"Surely not you?" cried the prince.

"Just so," said Lebedeff, with dignity; "and only this very morning I
have sent up a letter to the noble lady, stating that I have a matter of
great importance to communicate. She received the letter; I know she got
it; and she received ME, too."

"Have you just seen Lizabetha Prokofievna?" asked the prince, scarcely
believing his ears.

"Yes, I saw her, and got the said slap in the face as mentioned. She
chucked the letter back to me unopened, and kicked me out of the house,
morally, not physically, although not far off it."

"What letter do you mean she returned unopened?"

"What! didn't I tell you? Ha, ha, ha! I thought I had. Why, I received a
letter, you know, to be handed over--"

"From whom? To whom?"

But it was difficult, if not impossible, to extract anything from
Lebedeff. All the prince could gather was, that the letter had been
received very early, and had a request written on the outside that it
might be sent on to the address given.

"Just as before, sir, just as before! To a certain person, and from
a certain hand. The individual's name who wrote the letter is to be
represented by the letter A.--"

"What? Impossible! To Nastasia Philipovna? Nonsense!" cried the prince.

"It was, I assure you, and if not to her then to Rogojin, which is
the same thing. Mr. Hippolyte has had letters, too, and all from the
individual whose name begins with an A.," smirked Lebedeff, with a
hideous grin.

As he kept jumping from subject to subject, and forgetting what he had
begun to talk about, the prince said nothing, but waited, to give him
time.

It was all very vague. Who had taken the letters, if letters there were?
Probably Vera--and how could Lebedeff have got them? In all probability,
he had managed to steal the present letter from Vera, and had himself
gone over to Lizabetha Prokofievna with some idea in his head. So the
prince concluded at last.

"You are mad!" he cried, indignantly.

"Not quite, esteemed prince," replied Lebedeff, with some acerbity. "I
confess I thought of doing you the service of handing the letter over to
yourself, but I decided that it would pay me better to deliver it up to
the noble lady aforesaid, as I had informed her of everything hitherto
by anonymous letters; so when I sent her up a note from myself, with
the letter, you know, in order to fix a meeting for eight o'clock this
morning, I signed it 'your secret correspondent.' They let me in at
once--very quickly--by the back door, and the noble lady received me."

"Well? Go on."

"Oh, well, when I saw her she almost punched my head, as I say; in fact
so nearly that one might almost say she did punch my head. She threw
the letter in my face; she seemed to reflect first, as if she would
have liked to keep it, but thought better of it and threw it in my face
instead. 'If anybody can have been such a fool as to trust a man like
you to deliver the letter,' says she,' take it and deliver it! 'Hey! she
was grandly indignant. A fierce, fiery lady that, sir!"

"Where's the letter now?"

"Oh, I've still got it, here!"

And he handed the prince the very letter from Aglaya to Gania, which the
latter showed with so much triumph to his Sister at a later hour.

"This letter cannot be allowed to remain in your hands."

"It's for you--for you! I've brought it you on purpose!" cried Lebedeff,
excitedly. "Why, I'm yours again now, heart and hand, your slave; there
was but a momentary pause in the flow of my love and esteem for you. Mea
culpa, mea culpa! as the Pope of Rome says.

"This letter should be sent on at once," said the prince, disturbed.
"I'll hand it over myself."

"Wouldn't it be better, esteemed prince, wouldn't it be
better--to--don't you know--"

Lebedeff made a strange and very expressive grimace; he twisted about in
his chair, and did something, apparently symbolical, with his hands.

"What do you mean?" said the prince.

"Why, open it, for the time being, don't you know?" he said, most
confidentially and mysteriously.

The prince jumped up so furiously that Lebedeff ran towards the door;
having gained which strategic position, however, he stopped and looked
back to see if he might hope for pardon.

"Oh, Lebedeff, Lebedeff! Can a man really sink to such depths of
meanness?" said the prince, sadly.

Lebedeff's face brightened.

"Oh, I'm a mean wretch--a mean wretch!" he said, approaching the prince
once more, and beating his breast, with tears in his eyes.

"It's abominable dishonesty, you know!"

"Dishonesty--it is, it is! That's the very word!"

"What in the world induces you to act so? You are nothing but a spy.
Why did you write anonymously to worry so noble and generous a lady? Why
should not Aglaya Ivanovna write a note to whomever she pleases? What
did you mean to complain of today? What did you expect to get by it?
What made you go at all?"

"Pure amiable curiosity,--I assure you--desire to do a service. That's
all. Now I'm entirely yours again, your slave; hang me if you like!"

"Did you go before Lizabetha Prokofievna in your present condition?"
inquired the prince.

"No--oh no, fresher--more the correct card. I only became this like
after the humiliation I suffered there,

"Well--that'll do; now leave me."

This injunction had to be repeated several times before the man could be
persuaded to move. Even then he turned back at the door, came as far as
the middle of the room, and there went through his mysterious motions
designed to convey the suggestion that the prince should open the
letter. He did not dare put his suggestion into words again.

After this performance, he smiled sweetly and left the room on tiptoe.

All this had been very painful to listen to. One fact stood out certain
and clear, and that was that poor Aglaya must be in a state of great
distress and indecision and mental torment ("from jealousy," the prince
whispered to himself). Undoubtedly in this inexperienced, but hot and
proud little head, there were all sorts of plans forming, wild and
impossible plans, maybe; and the idea of this so frightened the prince
that he could not make up his mind what to do. Something must be done,
that was clear.

He looked at the address on the letter once more. Oh, he was not in the
least degree alarmed about Aglaya writing such a letter; he could trust
her. What he did not like about it was that he could not trust Gania.

However, he made up his mind that he would himself take the note and
deliver it. Indeed, he went so far as to leave the house and walk up the
road, but changed his mind when he had nearly reached Ptitsin's door.
However, he there luckily met Colia, and commissioned him to deliver the
letter to his brother as if direct from Aglaya. Colia asked no questions
but simply delivered it, and Gania consequently had no suspicion that it
had passed through so many hands.

Arrived home again, the prince sent for Vera Lebedeff and told her as
much as was necessary, in order to relieve her mind, for she had been in
a dreadful state of anxiety since she had missed the letter. She heard
with horror that her father had taken it. Muishkin learned from her that
she had on several occasions performed secret missions both for Aglaya
and for Rogojin, without, however, having had the slightest idea that in
so doing she might injure the prince in any way.

The latter, with one thing and another, was now so disturbed and
confused, that when, a couple of hours or so later, a message came from
Colia that the general was ill, he could hardly take the news in.

However, when he did master the fact, it acted upon him as a tonic
by completely distracting his attention. He went at once to Nina
Alexandrovna's, whither the general had been carried, and stayed there
until the evening. He could do no good, but there are people whom
to have near one is a blessing at such times. Colia was in an almost
hysterical state; he cried continuously, but was running about all day,
all the same; fetching doctors, of whom he collected three; going to the
chemist's, and so on.

The general was brought round to some extent, but the doctors
declared that he could not be said to be out of danger. Varia and Nina
Alexandrovna never left the sick man's bedside; Gania was excited and
distressed, but would not go upstairs, and seemed afraid to look at the
patient. He wrung his hands when the prince spoke to him, and said that
"such a misfortune at such a moment" was terrible.

The prince thought he knew what Gania meant by "such a moment."

Hippolyte was not in the house. Lebedeff turned up late in the
afternoon; he had been asleep ever since his interview with the prince
in the morning. He was quite sober now, and cried with real sincerity
over the sick general--mourning for him as though he were his own
brother. He blamed himself aloud, but did not explain why. He repeated
over and over again to Nina Alexandrovna that he alone was to blame--no
one else--but that he had acted out of "pure amiable curiosity," and
that "the deceased," as he insisted upon calling the still living
general, had been the greatest of geniuses.

He laid much stress on the genius of the sufferer, as if this idea must
be one of immense solace in the present crisis.

Nina Alexandrovna--seeing his sincerity of feeling--said at last,
and without the faintest suspicion of reproach in her voice: "Come,
come--don't cry! God will forgive you!"

Lebedeff was so impressed by these words, and the tone in which
they were spoken, that he could not leave Nina Alexandrovna all the
evening--in fact, for several days. Till the general's death, indeed, he
spent almost all his time at his side.

Twice during the day a messenger came to Nina Alexandrovna from the
Epanchins to inquire after the invalid.

When--late in the evening--the prince made his appearance in Lizabetha
Prokofievna's drawing-room, he found it full of guests. Mrs. Epanchin
questioned him very fully about the general as soon as he appeared; and
when old Princess Bielokonski wished to know "who this general was, and
who was Nina Alexandrovna," she proceeded to explain in a manner which
pleased the prince very much.

He himself, when relating the circumstances of the general's illness to
Lizabetha Prokofievna, "spoke beautifully," as Aglaya's sisters declared
afterwards--"modestly, quietly, without gestures or too many words, and
with great dignity." He had entered the room with propriety and grace,
and he was perfectly dressed; he not only did not "fall down on the
slippery floor," as he had expressed it, but evidently made a very
favourable impression upon the assembled guests.

As for his own impression on entering the room and taking his seat,
he instantly remarked that the company was not in the least such
as Aglaya's words had led him to fear, and as he had dreamed of--in
nightmare form--all night.

This was the first time in his life that he had seen a little corner of
what was generally known by the terrible name of "society." He had long
thirsted, for reasons of his own, to penetrate the mysteries of the
magic circle, and, therefore, this assemblage was of the greatest
possible interest to him.

His first impression was one of fascination. Somehow or other he felt
that all these people must have been born on purpose to be together! It
seemed to him that the Epanchins were not having a party at all; that
these people must have been here always, and that he himself was one
of them--returned among them after a long absence, but one of them,
naturally and indisputably.

It never struck him that all this refined simplicity and nobility and
wit and personal dignity might possibly be no more than an exquisite
artistic polish. The majority of the guests--who were somewhat
empty-headed, after all, in spite of their aristocratic bearing--never
guessed, in their self-satisfied composure, that much of their
superiority was mere veneer, which indeed they had adopted unconsciously
and by inheritance.

The prince would never so much as suspect such a thing in the delight of
his first impression.

He saw, for instance, that one important dignitary, old enough to be his
grandfather, broke off his own conversation in order to listen to HIM--a
young and inexperienced man; and not only listened, but seemed to
attach value to his opinion, and was kind and amiable, and yet they
were strangers and had never seen each other before. Perhaps what most
appealed to the prince's impressionability was the refinement of the old
man's courtesy towards him. Perhaps the soil of his susceptible nature
was really predisposed to receive a pleasant impression.

Meanwhile all these people-though friends of the family and of each
other to a certain extent--were very far from being such intimate
friends of the family and of each other as the prince concluded. There
were some present who never would think of considering the Epanchins
their equals. There were even some who hated one another cordially. For
instance, old Princess Bielokonski had all her life despised the wife
of the "dignitary," while the latter was very far from loving Lizabetha
Prokofievna. The dignitary himself had been General Epanchin's protector
from his youth up; and the general considered him so majestic a
personage that he would have felt a hearty contempt for himself if
he had even for one moment allowed himself to pose as the great man's
equal, or to think of him--in his fear and reverence-as anything less
than an Olympic God! There were others present who had not met for
years, and who had no feeling whatever for each other, unless it were
dislike; and yet they met tonight as though they had seen each other but
yesterday in some friendly and intimate assembly of kindred spirits.

It was not a large party, however. Besides Princess Bielokonski and the
old dignitary (who was really a great man) and his wife, there was an
old military general--a count or baron with a German name, a man reputed
to possess great knowledge and administrative ability. He was one
of those Olympian administrators who know everything except Russia,
pronounce a word of extraordinary wisdom, admired by all, about once in
five years, and, after being an eternity in the service, generally die
full of honour and riches, though they have never done anything great,
and have even been hostile to all greatness. This general was Ivan
Fedorovitch's immediate superior in the service; and it pleased the
latter to look upon him also as a patron. On the other hand, the great
man did not at all consider himself Epanchin's patron. He was always
very cool to him, while taking advantage of his ready services, and
would instantly have put another in his place if there had been the
slightest reason for the change.

Another guest was an elderly, important-looking gentleman, a distant
relative of Lizabetha Prokofievna's. This gentleman was rich, held a
good position, was a great talker, and had the reputation of being "one
of the dissatisfied," though not belonging to the dangerous sections
of that class. He had the manners, to some extent, of the English
aristocracy, and some of their tastes (especially in the matter of
under-done roast beef, harness, men-servants, etc.). He was a great
friend of the dignitary's, and Lizabetha Prokofievna, for some reason or
