"There is not another soul in the house now excepting our four selves,"
he said aloud, looking at the prince in a strange way.

Nastasia Philipovna was waiting for them in the first room they went
into. She was dressed very simply, in black.

She rose at their entrance, but did not smile or give her hand, even to
the prince. Her anxious eyes were fixed upon Aglaya. Both sat down, at
a little distance from one another--Aglaya on the sofa, in the corner
of the room, Nastasia by the window. The prince and Rogojin remained
standing, and were not invited to sit.

Muishkin glanced at Rogojin in perplexity, but the latter only smiled
disagreeably, and said nothing. The silence continued for some few
moments.

An ominous expression passed over Nastasia Philipovna's face, of a
sudden. It became obstinate-looking, hard, and full of hatred; but she
did not take her eyes off her visitors for a moment.

Aglaya was clearly confused, but not frightened. On entering she had
merely glanced momentarily at her rival, and then had sat still, with
her eyes on the ground, apparently in thought. Once or twice she
glanced casually round the room. A shade of disgust was visible in her
expression; she looked as though she were afraid of contamination in
this place.

She mechanically arranged her dress, and fidgeted uncomfortably,
eventually changing her seat to the other end of the sofa. Probably
she was unconscious of her own movements; but this very unconsciousness
added to the offensiveness of their suggested meaning.

At length she looked straight into Nastasia's eyes, and instantly read
all there was to read in her rival's expression. Woman understood woman!
Aglaya shuddered.

"You know of course why I requested this meeting?" she said at last,
quietly, and pausing twice in the delivery of this very short sentence.

"No--I know nothing about it," said Nastasia, drily and abruptly.

Aglaya blushed. Perhaps it struck her as very strange and impossible
that she should really be sitting here and waiting for "that woman's"
reply to her question.

At the first sound of Nastasia's voice a shudder ran through her frame.
Of course "that woman" observed and took in all this.

"You know quite well, but you are pretending to be ignorant," said
Aglaya, very low, with her eyes on the ground.

"Why should I?" asked Nastasia Philipovna, smiling slightly.

"You want to take advantage of my position, now that I am in your
house," continued Aglaya, awkwardly.

"For that position YOU are to blame and not I," said Nastasia, flaring
up suddenly. "_I_ did not invite YOU, but you me; and to this moment I
am quite ignorant as to why I am thus honoured."

Aglaya raised her head haughtily.

"Restrain your tongue!" she said. "I did not come here to fight you with
your own weapons.

"Oh! then you did come 'to fight,' I may conclude? Dear me!--and I
thought you were cleverer--"

They looked at one another with undisguised malice. One of these women
had written to the other, so lately, such letters as we have seen; and
it all was dispersed at their first meeting. Yet it appeared that
not one of the four persons in the room considered this in any degree
strange.

The prince who, up to yesterday, would not have believed that he could
even dream of such an impossible scene as this, stood and listened and
looked on, and felt as though he had long foreseen it all. The most
fantastic dream seemed suddenly to have been metamorphosed into the most
vivid reality.

One of these women so despised the other, and so longed to express her
contempt for her (perhaps she had only come for that very purpose, as
Rogojin said next day), that howsoever fantastical was the other woman,
howsoever afflicted her spirit and disturbed her understanding, no
preconceived idea of hers could possibly stand up against that deadly
feminine contempt of her rival. The prince felt sure that Nastasia
would say nothing about the letters herself; but he could judge by her
flashing eyes and the expression of her face what the thought of those
letters must be costing her at this moment. He would have given half his
life to prevent Aglaya from speaking of them. But Aglaya suddenly braced
herself up, and seemed to master herself fully, all in an instant.

"You have not quite understood," she said. "I did not come to quarrel
with you, though I do not like you. I came to speak to you as... as one
human being to another. I came with my mind made up as to what I had
to say to you, and I shall not change my intention, although you may
misunderstand me. So much the worse for you, not for myself! I wished to
reply to all you have written to me and to reply personally, because I
think that is the more convenient way. Listen to my reply to all your
letters. I began to be sorry for Prince Lef Nicolaievitch on the very
day I made his acquaintance, and when I heard--afterwards--of all that
took place at your house in the evening, I was sorry for him because he
was such a simple-minded man, and because he, in the simplicity of his
soul, believed that he could be happy with a woman of your character.
What I feared actually took place; you could not love him, you tortured
him, and threw him over. You could not love him because you are too
proud--no, not proud, that is an error; because you are too vain--no,
not quite that either; too self-loving; you are self-loving to madness.
Your letters to me are a proof of it. You could not love so simple a
soul as his, and perhaps in your heart you despised him and laughed at
him. All you could love was your shame and the perpetual thought that
you were disgraced and insulted. If you were less shameful, or had no
cause at all for shame, you would be still more unhappy than you are
now."

Aglaya brought out these thronging words with great satisfaction. They
came from her lips hurriedly and impetuously, and had been prepared and
thought out long ago, even before she had ever dreamed of the present
meeting. She watched with eagerness the effect of her speech as shown in
Nastasia's face, which was distorted with agitation.

"You remember," she continued, "he wrote me a letter at that time;
he says you know all about that letter and that you even read it. I
understand all by means of this letter, and understand it correctly. He
has since confirmed it all to me--what I now say to you, word for word.
After receiving his letter I waited; I guessed that you would soon come
back here, because you could never do without Petersburg; you are still
too young and lovely for the provinces. However, this is not my own
idea," she added, blushing dreadfully; and from this moment the colour
never left her cheeks to the end of her speech. "When I next saw the
prince I began to feel terribly pained and hurt on his account. Do not
laugh; if you laugh you are unworthy of understanding what I say."

"Surely you see that I am not laughing," said Nastasia, sadly and
sternly.

"However, it's all the same to me; laugh or not, just as you please.
When I asked him about you, he told me that he had long since ceased to
love you, that the very recollection of you was a torture to him, but
that he was sorry for you; and that when he thought of you his heart was
pierced. I ought to tell you that I never in my life met a man anything
like him for noble simplicity of mind and for boundless trustfulness.
I guessed that anyone who liked could deceive him, and that he would
immediately forgive anyone who did deceive him; and it was for this that
I grew to love him--"

Aglaya paused for a moment, as though suddenly brought up in
astonishment that she could have said these words, but at the same time
a great pride shone in her eyes, like a defiant assertion that it would
not matter to her if "this woman" laughed in her face for the admission
just made.

"I have told you all now, and of course you understand what I wish of
you."

"Perhaps I do; but tell me yourself," said Nastasia Philipovna, quietly.

Aglaya flushed up angrily.

"I wished to find out from you," she said, firmly, "by what right you
dare to meddle with his feelings for me? By what right you dared send me
those letters? By what right do you continually remind both me and him
that you love him, after you yourself threw him over and ran away from
him in so insulting and shameful a way?"

"I never told either him or you that I loved him!" replied Nastasia
Philipovna, with an effort. "And--and I did run away from him--you are
right there," she added, scarcely audibly.

"Never told either him or me?" cried Aglaya. "How about your letters?
Who asked you to try to persuade me to marry him? Was not that a
declaration from you? Why do you force yourself upon us in this way? I
confess I thought at first that you were anxious to arouse an aversion
for him in my heart by your meddling, in order that I might give him up;
and it was only afterwards that I guessed the truth. You imagined that
you were doing an heroic action! How could you spare any love for him,
when you love your own vanity to such an extent? Why could you not
simply go away from here, instead of writing me those absurd letters?
Why do you not NOW marry that generous man who loves you, and has done
you the honour of offering you his hand? It is plain enough why; if you
marry Rogojin you lose your grievance; you will have nothing more to
complain of. You will be receiving too much honour. Evgenie Pavlovitch
was saying the other day that you had read too many poems and are too
well educated for--your position; and that you live in idleness. Add to
this your vanity, and, there you have reason enough--"

"And do you not live in idleness?"

Things had come to this unexpected point too quickly. Unexpected because
Nastasia Philipovna, on her way to Pavlofsk, had thought and considered
a good deal, and had expected something different, though perhaps not
altogether good, from this interview; but Aglaya had been carried away
by her own outburst, just as a rolling stone gathers impetus as it
careers downhill, and could not restrain herself in the satisfaction of
revenge.

It was strange, Nastasia Philipovna felt, to see Aglaya like this. She
gazed at her, and could hardly believe her eyes and ears for a moment or
two.

Whether she were a woman who had read too many poems, as Evgenie
Pavlovitch supposed, or whether she were mad, as the prince had
assured Aglaya, at all events, this was a woman who, in spite of her
occasionally cynical and audacious manner, was far more refined and
trustful and sensitive than appeared. There was a certain amount of
romantic dreaminess and caprice in her, but with the fantastic was
mingled much that was strong and deep.

The prince realized this, and great suffering expressed itself in his
face.

Aglaya observed it, and trembled with anger.

"How dare you speak so to me?" she said, with a haughtiness which was
quite indescribable, replying to Nastasia's last remark.

"You must have misunderstood what I said," said Nastasia, in some
surprise.

"If you wished to preserve your good name, why did you not give up
your--your 'guardian,' Totski, without all that theatrical posturing?"
said Aglaya, suddenly a propos of nothing.

"What do you know of my position, that you dare to judge me?" cried
Nastasia, quivering with rage, and growing terribly white.

"I know this much, that you did not go out to honest work, but went away
with a rich man, Rogojin, in order to pose as a fallen angel. I don't
wonder that Totski was nearly driven to suicide by such a fallen angel."

"Silence!" cried Nastasia Philipovna. "You are about as fit to
understand me as the housemaid here, who bore witness against her lover
in court the other day. She would understand me better than you do."

"Probably an honest girl living by her own toil. Why do you speak of a
housemaid so contemptuously?"

"I do not despise toil; I despise you when you speak of toil."

"If you had cared to be an honest woman, you would have gone out as a
laundress."

Both had risen, and were gazing at one another with pallid faces.

"Aglaya, don't! This is unfair," cried the prince, deeply distressed.

Rogojin was not smiling now; he sat and listened with folded arms, and
lips tight compressed.

"There, look at her," cried Nastasia, trembling with passion. "Look at
this young lady! And I imagined her an angel! Did you come to me without
your governess, Aglaya Ivanovna? Oh, fie, now shall I just tell you why
you came here today? Shall I tell you without any embellishments? You
came because you were afraid of me!"

"Afraid of YOU?" asked Aglaya, beside herself with naive amazement that
the other should dare talk to her like this.

"Yes, me, of course! Of course you were afraid of me, or you would not
have decided to come. You cannot despise one you fear. And to think that
I have actually esteemed you up to this very moment! Do you know why
you are afraid of me, and what is your object now? You wished to satisfy
yourself with your own eyes as to which he loves best, myself or you,
because you are fearfully jealous."

"He has told me already that he hates you," murmured Aglaya, scarcely
audibly.

"Perhaps, perhaps! I am not worthy of him, I know. But I think you are
lying, all the same. He cannot hate me, and he cannot have said so. I am
ready to forgive you, in consideration of your position; but I confess
I thought better of you. I thought you were wiser, and more beautiful,
too; I did, indeed! Well, take your treasure! See, he is gazing at you,
he can't recollect himself. Take him, but on one condition; go away at
once, this instant!"

She fell back into a chair, and burst into tears. But suddenly some new
expression blazed in her eyes. She stared fixedly at Aglaya, and rose
from her seat.

"Or would you like me to bid him, BID HIM, do you hear, COMMAND HIM,
now, at once, to throw you up, and remain mine for ever? Shall I? He
will stay, and he will marry me too, and you shall trot home all alone.
Shall I?--shall I say the word?" she screamed like a madwoman, scarcely
believing herself that she could really pronounce such wild words.

Aglaya had made for the door in terror, but she stopped at the
threshold, and listened. "Shall I turn Rogojin off? Ha! ha! you thought
I would marry him for your benefit, did you? Why, I'll call out NOW, if
you like, in your presence, 'Rogojin, get out!' and say to the prince,
'Do you remember what you promised me?' Heavens! what a fool I have been
to humiliate myself before them! Why, prince, you yourself gave me your
word that you would marry me whatever happened, and would never abandon
me. You said you loved me and would forgive me all, and--and resp--yes,
you even said that! I only ran away from you in order to set you free,
and now I don't care to let you go again. Why does she treat me so--so
shamefully? I am not a loose woman--ask Rogojin there! He'll tell you.
Will you go again now that she has insulted me, before your eyes, too;
turn away from me and lead her away, arm-in-arm? May you be accursed
too, for you were the only one I trusted among them all! Go away,
Rogojin, I don't want you," she continued, blind with fury, and forcing
the words out with dry lips and distorted features, evidently not
believing a single word of her own tirade, but, at the same time, doing
her utmost to prolong the moment of self-deception.

The outburst was so terribly violent that the prince thought it would
have killed her.

"There he is!" she shrieked again, pointing to the prince and addressing
Aglaya. "There he is! and if he does not approach me at once and take ME
and throw you over, then have him for your own--I give him up to you! I
don't want him!"

Both she and Aglaya stood and waited as though in expectation, and both
looked at the prince like madwomen.

But he, perhaps, did not understand the full force of this challenge; in
fact, it is certain he did not. All he could see was the poor despairing
face which, as he had said to Aglaya, "had pierced his heart for ever."

He could bear it no longer, and with a look of entreaty, mingled with
reproach, he addressed Aglaya, pointing to Nastasia the while:

"How can you?" he murmured; "she is so unhappy."

But he had no time to say another word before. Aglaya's terrible look
bereft him of speech. In that look was embodied so dreadful a suffering
and so deadly a hatred, that he gave a cry and flew to her; but it was
too late.

She could not hold out long enough even to witness his movement in her
direction. She had hidden her face in her hands, cried once "Oh, my
God!" and rushed out of the room. Rogojin followed her to undo the bolts
of the door and let her out into the street.

The prince made a rush after her, but he, was caught and held back. The
distorted, livid face of Nastasia gazed at him reproachfully, and her
blue lips whispered:

"What? Would you go to her--to her?"

She fell senseless into his arms.

He raised her, carried her into the room, placed her in an arm-chair,
and stood over her, stupefied. On the table stood a tumbler of water.
Rogojin, who now returned, took this and sprinkled a little in her face.
She opened her eyes, but for a moment she understood nothing.

Suddenly she looked around, shuddered, gave a loud cry, and threw
herself in the prince's arms.

"Mine, mine!" she cried. "Has the proud young lady gone? Ha, ha, ha!"
she laughed hysterically. "And I had given him up to her! Why--why did
I? Mad--mad! Get away, Rogojin! Ha, ha, ha!"

Rogojin stared intently at them; then he took his hat, and without a
word, left the room.

A few moments later, the prince was seated by Nastasia on the sofa,
gazing into her eyes and stroking her face and hair, as he would a
little child's. He laughed when she laughed, and was ready to cry when
she cried. He did not speak, but listened to her excited, disconnected
chatter, hardly understanding a word of it the while. No sooner did
he detect the slightest appearance of complaining, or weeping, or
reproaching, than he would smile at her kindly, and begin stroking her
hair and her cheeks, soothing and consoling her once more, as if she
were a child.

IX.

A FORTNIGHT had passed since the events recorded in the last chapter,
and the position of the actors in our story had become so changed that
it is almost impossible for us to continue the tale without some few
explanations. Yet we feel that we ought to limit ourselves to the simple
record of facts, without much attempt at explanation, for a very patent
reason: because we ourselves have the greatest possible difficulty in
accounting for the facts to be recorded. Such a statement on our part
may appear strange to the reader. How is anyone to tell a story which he
cannot understand himself? In order to keep clear of a false position,
we had perhaps better give an example of what we mean; and probably the
intelligent reader will soon understand the difficulty. More especially
are we inclined to take this course since the example will constitute a
distinct march forward of our story, and will not hinder the progress of
the events remaining to be recorded.

During the next fortnight--that is, through the early part of July--the
history of our hero was circulated in the form of strange, diverting,
most unlikely-sounding stories, which passed from mouth to mouth,
through the streets and villas adjoining those inhabited by Lebedeff,
Ptitsin, Nastasia Philipovna and the Epanchins; in fact, pretty
well through the whole town and its environs. All society--both the
inhabitants of the place and those who came down of an evening for the
music--had got hold of one and the same story, in a thousand varieties
of detail--as to how a certain young prince had raised a terrible
scandal in a most respectable household, had thrown over a daughter of
the family, to whom he was engaged, and had been captured by a woman of
shady reputation whom he was determined to marry at once--breaking off
all old ties for the satisfaction of his insane idea; and, in spite of
the public indignation roused by his action, the marriage was to take
place in Pavlofsk openly and publicly, and the prince had announced his
intention of going through with it with head erect and looking the whole
world in the face. The story was so artfully adorned with scandalous
details, and persons of so great eminence and importance were
apparently mixed up in it, while, at the same time, the evidence was so
circumstantial, that it was no wonder the matter gave food for plenty of
curiosity and gossip.

According to the reports of the most talented gossip-mongers--those who,
in every class of society, are always in haste to explain every event
to their neighbours--the young gentleman concerned was of good family--a
prince--fairly rich--weak of intellect, but a democrat and a dabbler
in the Nihilism of the period, as exposed by Mr. Turgenieff. He could
hardly talk Russian, but had fallen in love with one of the Miss
Epanchins, and his suit met with so much encouragement that he had been
received in the house as the recognized bridegroom-to-be of the young
lady. But like the Frenchman of whom the story is told that he studied
for holy orders, took all the oaths, was ordained priest, and next
morning wrote to his bishop informing him that, as he did not believe
in God and considered it wrong to deceive the people and live upon their
pockets, he begged to surrender the orders conferred upon him the day
before, and to inform his lordship that he was sending this letter to
the public press,--like this Frenchman, the prince played a false game.
It was rumoured that he had purposely waited for the solemn occasion of
a large evening party at the house of his future bride, at which he was
introduced to several eminent persons, in order publicly to make known
his ideas and opinions, and thereby insult the "big-wigs," and to throw
over his bride as offensively as possible; and that, resisting the
servants who were told off to turn him out of the house, he had seized
and thrown down a magnificent china vase. As a characteristic addition
to the above, it was currently reported that the young prince really
loved the lady to whom he was engaged, and had thrown her over out of
purely Nihilistic motives, with the intention of giving himself the
satisfaction of marrying a fallen woman in the face of all the world,
thereby publishing his opinion that there is no distinction between
virtuous and disreputable women, but that all women are alike, free; and
a "fallen" woman, indeed, somewhat superior to a virtuous one.

It was declared that he believed in no classes or anything else,
excepting "the woman question."

All this looked likely enough, and was accepted as fact by most of the
inhabitants of the place, especially as it was borne out, more or less,
by daily occurrences.

Of course much was said that could not be determined absolutely. For
instance, it was reported that the poor girl had so loved her future
husband that she had followed him to the house of the other woman, the
day after she had been thrown over; others said that he had insisted on
her coming, himself, in order to shame and insult her by his taunts and
Nihilistic confessions when she reached the house. However all
these things might be, the public interest in the matter grew
daily, especially as it became clear that the scandalous wedding was
undoubtedly to take place.

So that if our readers were to ask an explanation, not of the wild
reports about the prince's Nihilistic opinions, but simply as to how
such a marriage could possibly satisfy his real aspirations, or as to
the spiritual condition of our hero at this time, we confess that we
should have great difficulty in giving the required information.

All we know is, that the marriage really was arranged, and that the
prince had commissioned Lebedeff and Keller to look after all the
necessary business connected with it; that he had requested them to
spare no expense; that Nastasia herself was hurrying on the wedding;
that Keller was to be the prince's best man, at his own earnest request;
and that Burdovsky was to give Nastasia away, to his great delight. The
wedding was to take place before the middle of July.

But, besides the above, we are cognizant of certain other undoubted
facts, which puzzle us a good deal because they seem flatly to
contradict the foregoing.

We suspect, for instance, that having commissioned Lebedeff and the
others, as above, the prince immediately forgot all about masters of
ceremonies and even the ceremony itself; and we feel quite certain that
in making these arrangements he did so in order that he might absolutely
escape all thought of the wedding, and even forget its approach if he
could, by detailing all business concerning it to others.

What did he think of all this time, then? What did he wish for? There is
no doubt that he was a perfectly free agent all through, and that as
far as Nastasia was concerned, there was no force of any kind brought
to bear on him. Nastasia wished for a speedy marriage, true!--but the
prince agreed at once to her proposals; he agreed, in fact, so casually
that anyone might suppose he was but acceding to the most simple and
ordinary suggestion.

There are many strange circumstances such as this before us; but in
our opinion they do but deepen the mystery, and do not in the smallest
degree help us to understand the case.

However, let us take one more example. Thus, we know for a fact that
during the whole of this fortnight the prince spent all his days and
evenings with Nastasia; he walked with her, drove with her; he began to
be restless whenever he passed an hour without seeing her--in fact,
to all appearances, he sincerely loved her. He would listen to her for
hours at a time with a quiet smile on his face, scarcely saying a word
himself. And yet we know, equally certainly, that during this period he
several times set off, suddenly, to the Epanchins', not concealing
the fact from Nastasia Philipovna, and driving the latter to absolute
despair. We know also that he was not received at the Epanchins' so long
as they remained at Pavlofsk, and that he was not allowed an interview
with Aglaya;--but next day he would set off once more on the same
errand, apparently quite oblivious of the fact of yesterday's visit
having been a failure,--and, of course, meeting with another refusal.
We know, too, that exactly an hour after Aglaya had fled from Nastasia
Philipovna's house on that fateful evening, the prince was at the
Epanchins',--and that his appearance there had been the cause of the
greatest consternation and dismay; for Aglaya had not been home, and the
family only discovered then, for the first time, that the two of them
had been to Nastasia's house together.

It was said that Elizabetha Prokofievna and her daughters had there and
then denounced the prince in the strongest terms, and had refused
any further acquaintance and friendship with him; their rage and
denunciations being redoubled when Varia Ardalionovna suddenly arrived
and stated that Aglaya had been at her house in a terrible state of mind
for the last hour, and that she refused to come home.

This last item of news, which disturbed Lizabetha Prokofievna more than
anything else, was perfectly true. On leaving Nastasia's, Aglaya had
felt that she would rather die than face her people, and had therefore
gone straight to Nina Alexandrovna's. On receiving the news, Lizabetha
and her daughters and the general all rushed off to Aglaya, followed
by Prince Lef Nicolaievitch--undeterred by his recent dismissal; but
through Varia he was refused a sight of Aglaya here also. The end of the
episode was that when Aglaya saw her mother and sisters crying over her
and not uttering a word of reproach, she had flung herself into their
arms and gone straight home with them.

It was said that Gania managed to make a fool of himself even on this
occasion; for, finding himself alone with Aglaya for a minute or two
when Varia had gone to the Epanchins', he had thought it a fitting
opportunity to make a declaration of his love, and on hearing this
Aglaya, in spite of her state of mind at the time, had suddenly burst
out laughing, and had put a strange question to him. She asked him
whether he would consent to hold his finger to a lighted candle in proof
of his devotion! Gania--it was said--looked so comically bewildered that
Aglaya had almost laughed herself into hysterics, and had rushed out of
the room and upstairs,--where her parents had found her.

Hippolyte told the prince this last story, sending for him on purpose.
When Muishkin heard about the candle and Gania's finger he had laughed
so that he had quite astonished Hippolyte,--and then shuddered and burst
into tears. The prince's condition during those days was strange and
perturbed. Hippolyte plainly declared that he thought he was out of his
mind;--this, however, was hardly to be relied upon.

Offering all these facts to our readers and refusing to explain them,
we do not for a moment desire to justify our hero's conduct. On the
contrary, we are quite prepared to feel our share of the indignation
which his behaviour aroused in the hearts of his friends. Even Vera
Lebedeff was angry with him for a while; so was Colia; so was Keller,
until he was selected for best man; so was Lebedeff himself,--who began
to intrigue against him out of pure irritation;--but of this anon. In
fact we are in full accord with certain forcible words spoken to the
prince by Evgenie Pavlovitch, quite unceremoniously, during the course
of a friendly conversation, six or seven days after the events at
Nastasia Philipovna's house.

We may remark here that not only the Epanchins themselves, but all who
had anything to do with them, thought it right to break with the prince
in consequence of his conduct. Prince S. even went so far as to turn
away and cut him dead in the street. But Evgenie Pavlovitch was not
afraid to compromise himself by paying the prince a visit, and did so,
in spite of the fact that he had recommenced to visit at the Epanchins',
where he was received with redoubled hospitality and kindness after the
temporary estrangement.

Evgenie called upon the prince the day after that on which the Epanchins
left Pavlofsk. He knew of all the current rumours,--in fact, he had
probably contributed to them himself. The prince was delighted to see
him, and immediately began to speak of the Epanchins;--which simple and
straightforward opening quite took Evgenie's fancy, so that he melted at
once, and plunged in medias res without ceremony.

The prince did not know, up to this, that the Epanchins had left the
place. He grew very pale on hearing the news; but a moment later he
nodded his head, and said thoughtfully:

"I knew it was bound to be so." Then he added quickly:

"Where have they gone to?"

Evgenie meanwhile observed him attentively, and the rapidity of the
questions, their simplicity, the prince's candour, and at the same
time, his evident perplexity and mental agitation, surprised him
considerably. However, he told Muishkin all he could, kindly and
in detail. The prince hardly knew anything, for this was the first
informant from the household whom he had met since the estrangement.

Evgenie reported that Aglaya had been really ill, and that for two
nights she had not slept at all, owing to high fever; that now she was
better and out of serious danger, but still in a nervous, hysterical
state.

"It's a good thing that there is peace in the house, at all events," he
continued. "They never utter a hint about the past, not only in Aglaya's
presence, but even among themselves. The old people are talking of a
trip abroad in the autumn, immediately after Adelaida's wedding; Aglaya
received the news in silence."

Evgenie himself was very likely going abroad also; so were Prince S.
and his wife, if affairs allowed of it; the general was to stay at home.
They were all at their estate of Colmina now, about twenty miles or so
from St. Petersburg. Princess Bielokonski had not returned to Moscow
yet, and was apparently staying on for reasons of her own. Lizabetha
Prokofievna had insisted that it was quite impossible to remain in
Pavlofsk after what had happened. Evgenie had told her of all the
rumours current in town about the affair; so that there could be no talk
of their going to their house on the Yelagin as yet.

"And in point of fact, prince," added Evgenie Pavlovitch, "you must
allow that they could hardly have stayed here, considering that they
knew of all that went on at your place, and in the face of your daily
visits to their house, visits which you insisted upon making in spite of
their refusal to see you."

"Yes--yes, quite so; you are quite right. I wished to see Aglaya
Ivanovna, you know!" said the prince, nodding his head.

"Oh, my dear fellow," cried Evgenie, warmly, with real sorrow in his
voice, "how could you permit all that to come about as it has? Of
course, of course, I know it was all so unexpected. I admit that you,
only naturally, lost your head, and--and could not stop the foolish
girl; that was not in your power. I quite see so much; but you really
should have understood how seriously she cared for you. She could not
bear to share you with another; and you could bring yourself to throw
away and shatter such a treasure! Oh, prince, prince!"

"Yes, yes, you are quite right again," said the poor prince, in anguish
of mind. "I was wrong, I know. But it was only Aglaya who looked on
Nastasia Philipovna so; no one else did, you know."

"But that's just the worst of it all, don't you see, that there was
absolutely nothing serious about the matter in reality!" cried Evgenie,
beside himself: "Excuse me, prince, but I have thought over all this; I
have thought a great deal over it; I know all that had happened before;
I know all that took place six months since; and I know there was
NOTHING serious about the matter, it was but fancy, smoke, fantasy,
distorted by agitation, and only the alarmed jealousy of an absolutely
inexperienced girl could possibly have mistaken it for serious reality."

Here Evgenie Pavlovitch quite let himself go, and gave the reins to his
indignation.

Clearly and reasonably, and with great psychological insight, he drew a
picture of the prince's past relations with Nastasia Philipovna.
Evgenie Pavlovitch always had a ready tongue, but on this occasion his
eloquence, surprised himself. "From the very beginning," he said, "you
began with a lie; what began with a lie was bound to end with a lie;
such is the law of nature. I do not agree, in fact I am angry, when I
hear you called an idiot; you are far too intelligent to deserve such
an epithet; but you are so far STRANGE as to be unlike others; that you
must allow, yourself. Now, I have come to the conclusion that the basis
of all that has happened, has been first of all your innate inexperience
(remark the expression 'innate,' prince). Then follows your unheard-of
simplicity of heart; then comes your absolute want of sense of
proportion (to this want you have several times confessed); and lastly,
a mass, an accumulation, of intellectual convictions which you, in your
unexampled honesty of soul, accept unquestionably as also innate and
natural and true. Admit, prince, that in your relations with Nastasia
Philipovna there has existed, from the very first, something democratic,
and the fascination, so to speak, of the 'woman question'? I know all
about that scandalous scene at Nastasia Philipovna's house when Rogojin
brought the money, six months ago. I'll show you yourself as in a
looking-glass, if you like. I know exactly all that went on, in every
detail, and why things have turned out as they have. You thirsted, while
in Switzerland, for your home-country, for Russia; you read, doubtless,
many books about Russia, excellent books, I dare say, but hurtful to
YOU; and you arrived here; as it were, on fire with the longing to be
of service. Then, on the very day of your arrival, they tell you a sad
story of an ill-used woman; they tell YOU, a knight, pure and without
reproach, this tale of a poor woman! The same day you actually SEE
her; you are attracted by her beauty, her fantastic, almost demoniacal,
beauty--(I admit her beauty, of course).

"Add to all this your nervous nature, your epilepsy, and your sudden
arrival in a strange town--the day of meetings and of exciting scenes,
the day of unexpected acquaintanceships, the day of sudden actions,
the day of meeting with the three lovely Epanchin girls, and among
them Aglaya--add your fatigue, your excitement; add Nastasia' s evening
party, and the tone of that party, and--what were you to expect of
yourself at such a moment as that?"

"Yes, yes, yes!" said the prince, once more, nodding his head, and
blushing slightly. "Yes, it was so, or nearly so--I know it. And
besides, you see, I had not slept the night before, in the train, or the
night before that, either, and I was very tired."

"Of course, of course, quite so; that's what I am driving at!"
continued Evgenie, excitedly. "It is as clear as possible, and most
comprehensible, that you, in your enthusiasm, should plunge headlong
into the first chance that came of publicly airing your great idea that
you, a prince, and a pure-living man, did not consider a woman disgraced
if the sin were not her own, but that of a disgusting social libertine!
Oh, heavens! it's comprehensible enough, my dear prince, but that is not
the question, unfortunately! The question is, was there any reality
and truth in your feelings? Was it nature, or nothing but intellectual
enthusiasm? What do you think yourself? We are told, of course, that a
far worse woman was FORGIVEN, but we don't find that she was told that
she had done well, or that she was worthy of honour and respect! Did not
your common-sense show you what was the real state of the case, a few
months later? The question is now, not whether she is an innocent woman
(I do not insist one way or the other--I do not wish to); but can her
whole career justify such intolerable pride, such insolent, rapacious
egotism as she has shown? Forgive me, I am too violent, perhaps, but--"

"Yes--I dare say it is all as you say; I dare say you are quite right,"
muttered the prince once more. "She is very sensitive and easily put
out, of course; but still, she..."

"She is worthy of sympathy? Is that what you wished to say, my good
fellow? But then, for the mere sake of vindicating her worthiness of
sympathy, you should not have insulted and offended a noble and generous
girl in her presence! This is a terrible exaggeration of sympathy! How
can you love a girl, and yet so humiliate her as to throw her over for
the sake of another woman, before the very eyes of that other woman,
when you have already made her a formal proposal of marriage? And you
DID propose to her, you know; you did so before her parents and sisters.
Can you be an honest man, prince, if you act so? I ask you! And did you
not deceive that beautiful girl when you assured her of your love?"

"Yes, you are quite right. Oh! I feel that I am very guilty!" said
Muishkin, in deepest distress.

"But as if that is enough!" cried Evgenie, indignantly. "As if it is
enough simply to say: 'I know I am very guilty!' You are to blame, and
yet you persevere in evil-doing. Where was your heart, I should like to
know, your CHRISTIAN HEART, all that time? Did she look as though she
were suffering less, at that moment? You saw her face--was she suffering
less than the other woman? How could you see her suffering and allow it
to continue? How could you?"

"But I did not allow it," murmured the wretched prince.

"How--what do you mean you didn't allow?"

"Upon my word, I didn't! To this moment I don't know how it all
happened. I--I ran after Aglaya Ivanovna, but Nastasia Philipovna fell
down in a faint; and since that day they won't let me see Aglaya--that's
all I know."

"It's all the same; you ought to have run after Aglaya though the other
was fainting."

"Yes, yes, I ought--but I couldn't! She would have died--she would
have killed herself. You don't know her; and I should have told Aglaya
everything afterwards--but I see, Evgenie Pavlovitch, you don't know
all. Tell me now, why am I not allowed to see Aglaya? I should have
cleared it all up, you know. Neither of them kept to the real point, you
see. I could never explain what I mean to you, but I think I could to
Aglaya. Oh! my God, my God! You spoke just now of Aglaya's face at the
moment when she ran away. Oh, my God! I remember it! Come along,
come along--quick!" He pulled at Evgenie's coat-sleeve nervously and
excitedly, and rose from his chair.

"Where to?"

"Come to Aglaya--quick, quick!"

"But I told you she is not at Pavlofsk. And what would be the use if she
were?"

"Oh, she'll understand, she'll understand!" cried the prince, clasping
his hands. "She would understand that all this is not the point--not a
bit the real point--it is quite foreign to the real question."

"How can it be foreign? You ARE going to be married, are you not? Very
well, then you are persisting in your course. ARE you going to marry her
or not?"

"Yes, I shall marry her--yes."

"Then why is it 'not the point'?"

"Oh, no, it is not the point, not a bit. It makes no difference, my
marrying her--it means nothing."

"How 'means nothing'? You are talking nonsense, my friend. You are
marrying the woman you love in order to secure her happiness, and Aglaya
sees and knows it. How can you say that it's 'not the point'?"

"Her happiness? Oh, no! I am only marrying her--well, because she wished
it. It means nothing--it's all the same. She would certainly have
died. I see now that that marriage with Rogojin was an insane idea. I
understand all now that I did not understand before; and, do you know,
when those two stood opposite to one another, I could not bear Nastasia
Philipovna's face! You must know, Evgenie Pavlovitch, I have never told
anyone before--not even Aglaya--that I cannot bear Nastasia Philipovna's
face." (He lowered his voice mysteriously as he said this.) "You
described that evening at Nastasia Philipovna's (six months since) very
accurately just now; but there is one thing which you did not mention,
and of which you took no account, because you do not know. I mean her
FACE--I looked at her face, you see. Even in the morning when I saw her
portrait, I felt that I could not BEAR to look at it. Now, there's Vera
Lebedeff, for instance, her eyes are quite different, you know. I'm
AFRAID of her face!" he added, with real alarm.

"You are AFRAID of it?"

"Yes--she's mad!" he whispered, growing pale.

"Do you know this for certain?" asked Evgenie, with the greatest
curiosity.

"Yes, for certain--quite for certain, now! I have discovered it
ABSOLUTELY for certain, these last few days."

"What are you doing, then?" cried Evgenie, in horror. "You must be
marrying her solely out of FEAR, then! I can't make head or tail of it,
prince. Perhaps you don't even love her?"

"Oh, no; I love her with all my soul. Why, she is a child! She's a child
now--a real child. Oh! you know nothing about it at all, I see."

"And are you assured, at the same time, that you love Aglaya too?"

"Yes--yes--oh; yes!"

"How so? Do you want to make out that you love them BOTH?"

"Yes--yes--both! I do!"

"Excuse me, prince, but think what you are saying! Recollect yourself!"

"Without Aglaya--I--I MUST see Aglaya!--I shall die in my sleep very
soon--I thought I was dying in my sleep last night. Oh! if Aglaya only
knew all--I mean really, REALLY all! Because she must know ALL--that's
the first condition towards understanding. Why cannot we ever know all
about another, especially when that other has been guilty? But I
don't know what I'm talking about--I'm so confused. You pained me so
dreadfully. Surely--surely Aglaya has not the same expression now as
she had at the moment when she ran away? Oh, yes! I am guilty and I
know it--I know it! Probably I am in fault all round--I don't quite know
how--but I am in fault, no doubt. There is something else, but I cannot
explain it to you, Evgenie Pavlovitch. I have no words; but Aglaya will
understand. I have always believed Aglaya will understand--I am assured
she will."

"No, prince, she will not. Aglaya loved like a woman, like a human
being, not like an abstract spirit. Do you know what, my poor prince?
The most probable explanation of the matter is that you never loved
either the one or the other in reality."

"I don't know--perhaps you are right in much that you have said, Evgenie
Pavlovitch. You are very wise, Evgenie Pavlovitch--oh! how my head is
beginning to ache again! Come to her, quick--for God's sake, come!"

"But I tell you she is not in Pavlofsk! She's in Colmina."

"Oh, come to Colmina, then! Come--let us go at once!"

"No--no, impossible!" said Evgenie, rising.

"Look here--I'll write a letter--take a letter for me!"

"No--no, prince; you must forgive me, but I can't undertake any such
commissions! I really can't."

And so they parted.

Evgenie Pavlovitch left the house with strange convictions. He, too,
felt that the prince must be out of his mind.

"And what did he mean by that FACE--a face which he so fears, and yet
so loves? And meanwhile he really may die, as he says, without seeing
Aglaya, and she will never know how devotedly he loves her! Ha, ha, ha!
How does the fellow manage to love two of them? Two different kinds of
love, I suppose! This is very interesting--poor idiot! What on earth
will become of him now?"

X.

THE prince did not die before his wedding--either by day or night, as
he had foretold that he might. Very probably he passed disturbed nights,
and was afflicted with bad dreams; but, during the daytime, among his
fellow-men, he seemed as kind as ever, and even contented; only a little
thoughtful when alone.

The wedding was hurried on. The day was fixed for exactly a week after
Evgenie's visit to the prince. In the face of such haste as this,
even the prince's best friends (if he had had any) would have felt the
hopelessness of any attempt to save "the poor madman." Rumour said that
in the visit of Evgenie Pavlovitch was to be discerned the influence of
Lizabetha Prokofievna and her husband... But if those good souls, in
the boundless kindness of their hearts, were desirous of saving the
eccentric young fellow from ruin, they were unable to take any stronger
measures to attain that end. Neither their position, nor their private
inclination, perhaps (and only naturally), would allow them to use any
more pronounced means.

We have observed before that even some of the prince's nearest
neighbours had begun to oppose him. Vera Lebedeff's passive disagreement
was limited to the shedding of a few solitary tears; to more frequent
sitting alone at home, and to a diminished frequency in her visits to
the prince's apartments.

Colia was occupied with his father at this time. The old man died during
a second stroke, which took place just eight days after the first. The
prince showed great sympathy in the grief of the family, and during the
first days of their mourning he was at the house a great deal with Nina
Alexandrovna. He went to the funeral, and it was observable that the
public assembled in church greeted his arrival and departure with
whisperings, and watched him closely.

The same thing happened in the park and in the street, wherever he went.
He was pointed out when he drove by, and he often overheard the name of
Nastasia Philipovna coupled with his own as he passed. People looked
out for her at the funeral, too, but she was not there; and another
conspicuous absentee was the captain's widow, whom Lebedeff had
prevented from coming.

The funeral service produced a great effect on the prince. He whispered
to Lebedeff that this was the first time he had ever heard a Russian
funeral service since he was a little boy. Observing that he was looking
about him uneasily, Lebedeff asked him whom he was seeking.

"Nothing. I only thought I--"

"Is it Rogojin?"

"Why--is he here?"

"Yes, he's in church."

"I thought I caught sight of his eyes!" muttered the prince, in
confusion. "But what of it!--Why is he here? Was he asked?"

"Oh, dear, no! Why, they don't even know him! Anyone can come in, you
know. Why do you look so amazed? I often meet him; I've seen him at
least four times, here at Pavlofsk, within the last week."

"I haven't seen him once--since that day!" the prince murmured.

As Nastasia Philipovna had not said a word about having met Rogojin
since "that day," the prince concluded that the latter had his own
reasons for wishing to keep out of sight. All the day of the funeral our
hero, was in a deeply thoughtful state, while Nastasia Philipovna was
particularly merry, both in the daytime and in the evening.

Colia had made it up with the prince before his father's death, and it
was he who urged him to make use of Keller and Burdovsky, promising
to answer himself for the former's behaviour. Nina Alexandrovna and
Lebedeff tried to persuade him to have the wedding in St. Petersburg,
instead of in the public fashion contemplated, down here at Pavlofsk
in the height of the season. But the prince only said that Nastasia
Philipovna desired to have it so, though he saw well enough what
prompted their arguments.

The next day Keller came to visit the prince. He was in a high state of
delight with the post of honour assigned to him at the wedding.

Before entering he stopped on the threshold, raised his hand as if
making a solemn vow, and cried:

"I won't drink!"

Then he went up to the prince, seized both his hands, shook them warmly,
and declared that he had at first felt hostile towards the project of
this marriage, and had openly said so in the billiard-rooms, but that
the reason simply was that, with the impatience of a friend, he had
hoped to see the prince marry at least a Princess de Rohan or de Chabot;
but that now he saw that the prince's way of thinking was ten times more
noble than that of "all the rest put together." For he desired neither
pomp nor wealth nor honour, but only the truth! The sympathies of
exalted personages were well known, and the prince was too highly
placed by his education, and so on, not to be in some sense an exalted
personage!

"But all the common herd judge 'differently; in the town, at
the meetings, in the villas, at the band, in the inns and the
billiard-rooms, the coming event has only to be mentioned and there are
shouts and cries from everybody. I have even heard talk of getting up a
'charivari' under the windows on the wedding-night. So if 'you have need
of the pistol' of an honest man, prince, I am ready to fire half a dozen
shots even before you rise from your nuptial couch!"

Keller also advised, in anticipation of the crowd making a rush after
the ceremony, that a fire-hose should be placed at the entrance to the
house; but Lebedeff was opposed to this measure, which he said might
result in the place being pulled down.

"I assure you, prince, that Lebedeff is intriguing against you. He wants
to put you under control. Imagine that! To take 'from you the use of
your free-will and your money--that' is to say, the two things that
distinguish us from the animals! I have heard it said positively. It is
the sober truth."

The prince recollected that somebody had told him something of the kind
before, and he had, of course, scoffed at it. He only laughed now, and
forgot the hint at once.

Lebedeff really had been busy for some little while; but, as usual, his
plans had become too complex to succeed, through sheer excess of ardour.
When he came to the prince--the very day before the wedding--to confess
(for he always confessed to the persons against whom he intrigued,
especially when the plan failed), he informed our hero that he himself
was a born Talleyrand, but for some unknown reason had become simple
Lebedeff. He then proceeded to explain his whole game to the prince,
interesting the latter exceedingly.

According to Lebedeff's account, he had first tried what he could do
with General Epanchin. The latter informed him that he wished well to
the unfortunate young man, and would gladly do what he could to "save
him," but that he did not think it would be seemly for him to interfere
in this matter. Lizabetha Prokofievna would neither hear nor see him.
Prince S. and Evgenie Pavlovitch only shrugged their shoulders, and
implied that it was no business of theirs. However, Lebedeff had not
lost heart, and went off to a clever lawyer,--a worthy and respectable
man, whom he knew well. This old gentleman informed him that the thing
was perfectly feasible if he could get hold of competent witnesses as
to Muishkin's mental incapacity. Then, with the assistance of a few
influential persons, he would soon see the matter arranged.

Lebedeff immediately procured the services of an old doctor, and carried
the latter away to Pavlofsk to see the prince, by way of viewing the
ground, as it were, and to give him (Lebedeff) counsel as to whether
the thing was to be done or not. The visit was not to be official, but
merely friendly.

Muishkin remembered the doctor's visit quite well. He remembered that
Lebedeff had said that he looked ill, and had better see a doctor; and
although the prince scouted the idea, Lebedeff had turned up almost
immediately with his old friend, explaining that they had just met at
the bedside of Hippolyte, who was very ill, and that the doctor had
something to tell the prince about the sick man.

The prince had, of course, at once received him, and had plunged into
a conversation about Hippolyte. He had given the doctor an account of
Hippolyte's attempted suicide; and had proceeded thereafter to talk of
his own malady,--of Switzerland, of Schneider, and so on; and so
deeply was the old man interested by the prince's conversation and his
description of Schneider's system, that he sat on for two hours.

Muishkin gave him excellent cigars to smoke, and Lebedeff, for his part,
regaled him with liqueurs, brought in by Vera, to whom the doctor--a
married man and the father of a family--addressed such compliments that
she was filled with indignation. They parted friends, and, after leaving
the prince, the doctor said to Lebedeff: "If all such people were put
under restraint, there would be no one left for keepers." Lebedeff then,
in tragic tones, told of the approaching marriage, whereupon the other
nodded his head and replied that, after all, marriages like that were
not so rare; that he had heard that the lady was very fascinating and of
extraordinary beauty, which was enough to explain the infatuation of a
wealthy man; that, further, thanks to the liberality of Totski and of
Rogojin, she possessed--so he had heard--not only money, but pearls,
diamonds, shawls, and furniture, and consequently she could not be
considered a bad match. In brief, it seemed to the doctor that the
prince's choice, far from being a sign of foolishness, denoted, on the
contrary, a shrewd, calculating, and practical mind. Lebedeff had been
much struck by this point of view, and he terminated his confession
by assuring the prince that he was ready, if need be, to shed his very
life's blood for him.

Hippolyte, too, was a source of some distraction to the prince at this
time; he would send for him at any and every hour of the day. They
lived,--Hippolyte and his mother and the children,--in a small house not
far off, and the little ones were happy, if only because they were able
to escape from the invalid into the garden. The prince had enough to do
in keeping the peace between the irritable Hippolyte and his mother, and
eventually the former became so malicious and sarcastic on the subject
of the approaching wedding, that Muishkin took offence at last, and
refused to continue his visits.

A couple of days later, however, Hippolyte's mother came with tears in
her eyes, and begged the prince to come back, "or HE would eat her up
bodily." She added that Hippolyte had a great secret to disclose. Of
course the prince went. There was no secret, however, unless we reckon
certain pantings and agitated glances around (probably all put on) as
the invalid begged his visitor to "beware of Rogojin."

"He is the sort of man," he continued, "who won't give up his object,
you know; he is not like you and me, prince--he belongs to quite a
different order of beings. If he sets his heart on a thing he won't be
afraid of anything--" and so on.

Hippolyte was very ill, and looked as though he could not long survive.
He was tearful at first, but grew more and more sarcastic and malicious
as the interview proceeded.

The prince questioned him in detail as to his hints about Rogojin. He
was anxious to seize upon some facts which might confirm Hippolyte's
vague warnings; but there were none; only Hippolyte's own private
impressions and feelings.

However, the invalid--to his immense satisfaction--ended by seriously
alarming the prince.

At first Muishkin had not cared to make any reply to his sundry
questions, and only smiled in response to Hippolyte's advice to "run for
his life--abroad, if necessary. There are Russian priests everywhere,
and one can get married all over the world."

But it was Hippolyte's last idea which upset him.

"What I am really alarmed about, though," he said, "is Aglaya Ivanovna.
Rogojin knows how you love her. Love for love. You took Nastasia
Philipovna from him. He will murder Aglaya Ivanovna; for though she is
not yours, of course, now, still such an act would pain you,--wouldn't
it?"

He had attained his end. The prince left the house beside himself with
terror.

These warnings about Rogojin were expressed on the day before the
wedding. That evening the prince saw Nastasia Philipovna for the last
time before they were to meet at the altar; but Nastasia was not in a
position to give him any comfort or consolation. On the contrary, she
only added to his mental perturbation as the evening went on. Up to this
time she had invariably done her best to cheer him--she was afraid of
his looking melancholy; she would try singing to him, and telling him
every sort of funny story or reminiscence that she could recall. The
prince nearly always pretended to be amused, whether he were so
actually or no; but often enough he laughed sincerely, delighted by the
brilliancy of her wit when she was carried away by her narrative, as she
very often was. Nastasia would be wild with joy to see the impression
she had made, and to hear his laugh of real amusement; and she would
remain the whole evening in a state of pride and happiness. But this
evening her melancholy and thoughtfulness grew with every hour.

The prince had told Evgenie Pavlovitch with perfect sincerity that he
loved Nastasia Philipovna with all his soul. In his love for her there
was the sort of tenderness one feels for a sick, unhappy child which
cannot be left alone. He never spoke of his feelings for Nastasia
to anyone, not even to herself. When they were together they never
discussed their "feelings," and there was nothing in their cheerful,
animated conversation which an outsider could not have heard. Daria
Alexeyevna, with whom Nastasia was staying, told afterwards how she had
been filled with joy and delight only to look at them, all this time.

Thanks to the manner in which he regarded Nastasia's mental and moral
condition, the prince was to some extent freed from other perplexities.
She was now quite different from the woman he had known three months
before. He was not astonished, for instance, to see her now so impatient
to marry him--she who formerly had wept with rage and hurled curses and
reproaches at him if he mentioned marriage! "It shows that she no longer
fears, as she did then, that she would make me unhappy by marrying me,"
he thought. And he felt sure that so sudden a change could not be a
natural one. This rapid growth of self-confidence could not be due only
to her hatred for Aglaya. To suppose that would be to suspect the depth
of her feelings. Nor could it arise from dread of the fate that awaited
her if she married Rogojin. These causes, indeed, as well as others,
might have played a part in it, but the true reason, Muishkin decided,
was the one he had long suspected--that the poor sick soul had come to
the end of its forces. Yet this was an explanation that did not procure
him any peace of mind. At times he seemed to be making violent efforts
to think of nothing, and one would have said that he looked on his
marriage as an unimportant formality, and on his future happiness as a
thing not worth considering. As to conversations such as the one held
with Evgenie Pavlovitch, he avoided them as far as possible, feeling
that there were certain objections to which he could make no answer.

The prince had observed that Nastasia knew well enough what Aglaya was
to him. He never spoke of it, but he had seen her face when she had
caught him starting off for the Epanchins' house on several occasions.
When the Epanchins left Pavlofsk, she had beamed with radiance and
happiness. Unsuspicious and unobservant as he was, he had feared at that
time that Nastasia might have some scheme in her mind for a scene or
scandal which would drive Aglaya out of Pavlofsk. She had encouraged
the rumours and excitement among the inhabitants of the place as to her
marriage with the prince, in order to annoy her rival; and, finding
it difficult to meet the Epanchins anywhere, she had, on one occasion,
taken him for a drive past their house. He did not observe what was
happening until they were almost passing the windows, when it was too
late to do anything. He said nothing, but for two days afterwards he was
ill.

Nastasia did not try that particular experiment again. A few days before
that fixed for the wedding, she grew grave and thoughtful. She always
ended by getting the better of her melancholy, and becoming merry and
cheerful again, but not quite so unaffectedly happy as she had been some
days earlier.

The prince redoubled his attentive study of her symptoms. It was a most
curious circumstance, in his opinion, that she never spoke of Rogojin.
But once, about five days before the wedding, when the prince was at
home, a messenger arrived begging him to come at once, as Nastasia
Philipovna was very ill.

He had found her in a condition approaching to absolute madness. She
screamed, and trembled, and cried out that Rogojin was hiding out there
in the garden--that she had seen him herself--and that he would murder
her in the night--that he would cut her throat. She was terribly
agitated all day. But it so happened that the prince called at
Hippolyte's house later on, and heard from his mother that she had been
in town all day, and had there received a visit from Rogojin, who had
made inquiries about Pavlofsk. On inquiry, it turned out that Rogojin
visited the old lady in town at almost the same moment when Nastasia
declared that she had seen him in the garden; so that the whole thing
turned out to be an illusion on her part. Nastasia immediately went
across to Hippolyte's to inquire more accurately, and returned immensely
relieved and comforted.

On the day before the wedding, the prince left Nastasia in a state of
great animation. Her wedding-dress and all sorts of finery had just
arrived from town. Muishkin had not imagined that she would be so
excited over it, but he praised everything, and his praise rendered her
doubly happy.

But Nastasia could not hide the cause of her intense interest in her
wedding splendour. She had heard of the indignation in the town, and
knew that some of the populace was getting up a sort of charivari with
music, that verses had been composed for the occasion, and that the
rest of Pavlofsk society more or less encouraged these preparations. So,
since attempts were being made to humiliate her, she wanted to hold her
head even higher than usual, and to overwhelm them all with the beauty
and taste of her toilette. "Let them shout and whistle, if they dare!"
Her eyes flashed at the thought. But, underneath this, she had another
motive, of which she did not speak. She thought that possibly Aglaya,
or at any rate someone sent by her, would be present incognito at
the ceremony, or in the crowd, and she wished to be prepared for this
eventuality.

The prince left her at eleven, full of these thoughts, and went home.
But it was not twelve o'clock when a messenger came to say that Nastasia
was very bad, and he must come at once.

On hurrying back he found his bride locked up in her own room and could
hear her hysterical cries and sobs. It was some time before she could be
made to hear that the prince had come, and then she opened the door only
just sufficiently to let him in, and immediately locked it behind him.
She then fell on her knees at his feet. (So at least Dana Alexeyevna
reported.)

"What am I doing? What am I doing to you?" she sobbed convulsively,
embracing his knees.

The prince was a whole hour soothing and comforting her, and left her,
at length, pacified and composed. He sent another messenger during the
night to inquire after her, and two more next morning. The last
brought back a message that Nastasia was surrounded by a whole army of
dressmakers and maids, and was as happy and as busy as such a beauty
should be on her wedding morning, and that there was not a vestige of
yesterday's agitation remaining. The message concluded with the
news that at the moment of the bearer's departure there was a great
confabulation in progress as to which diamonds were to be worn, and how.

This message entirely calmed the prince's mind.

The following report of the proceedings on the wedding day may be
depended upon, as coming from eye-witnesses.

The wedding was fixed for eight o'clock in the evening. Nastasia
Philipovna was ready at seven. From six o'clock groups of people began
to gather at Nastasia's house, at the prince's, and at the church door,
but more especially at the former place. The church began to fill at
seven.

Colia and Vera Lebedeff were very anxious on the prince's account, but
they were so busy over the arrangements for receiving the guests after
the wedding, that they had not much time for the indulgence of personal
feelings.

There were to be very few guests besides the best men and so on; only
Dana Alexeyevna, the Ptitsins, Gania, and the doctor. When the prince
asked Lebedeff why he had invited the doctor, who was almost a stranger,
Lebedeff replied:

"Why, he wears an 'order,' and it looks so well!"

This idea amused the prince.

Keller and Burdovsky looked wonderfully correct in their dress-coats and
white kid gloves, although Keller caused the bridegroom some alarm by
his undisguisedly hostile glances at the gathering crowd of sight-seers
outside.

At about half-past seven the prince started for the church in his
carriage.

We may remark here that he seemed anxious not to omit a single one of
the recognized customs and traditions observed at weddings. He wished
all to be done as openly as possible, and "in due order."

Arrived at the church, Muishkin, under Keller's guidance, passed
through the crowd of spectators, amid continuous whispering and excited
exclamations. The prince stayed near the altar, while Keller made off
once more to fetch the bride.

On reaching the gate of Daria Alexeyevna's house, Keller found a far
denser crowd than he had encountered at the prince's. The remarks and
exclamations of the spectators here were of so irritating a nature that
Keller was very near making them a speech on the impropriety of their
conduct, but was luckily caught by Burdovsky, in the act of turning to
address them, and hurried indoors.

Nastasia Philipovna was ready. She rose from her seat, looked into the
glass and remarked, as Keller told the tale afterwards, that she was "as
pale as a corpse." She then bent her head reverently, before the ikon in
the corner, and left the room.

A torrent of voices greeted her appearance at the front door. The crowd
whistled, clapped its hands, and laughed and shouted; but in a moment or
two isolated voices were distinguishable.

"What a beauty!" cried one.

"Well, she isn't the first in the world, nor the last," said another.

"Marriage covers everything," observed a third.

"I defy you to find another beauty like that," said a fourth.

"She's a real princess! I'd sell my soul for such a princess as that!"

Nastasia came out of the house looking as white as any handkerchief; but
her large dark eyes shone upon the vulgar crowd like blazing coals.
The spectators' cries were redoubled, and became more exultant and
triumphant every moment. The door of the carriage was open, and Keller
had given his hand to the bride to help her in, when suddenly with
a loud cry she rushed from him, straight into the surging crowd. Her
friends about her were stupefied with amazement; the crowd parted as she
rushed through it, and suddenly, at a distance of five or six yards
from the carriage, appeared Rogojin. It was his look that had caught her
eyes.

Nastasia rushed to him like a madwoman, and seized both his hands.

"Save me!" she cried. "Take me away, anywhere you like, quick!"

Rogojin seized her in his arms and almost carried her to the carriage.
Then, in a flash, he tore a hundred-rouble note out of his pocket and
held it to the coachman.

"To the station, quick! If you catch the train you shall have another.
Quick!"

He leaped into the carriage after Nastasia and banged the door. The
coachman did not hesitate a moment; he whipped up the horses, and they
were oft.

"One more second and I should have stopped him," said Keller,
afterwards. In fact, he and Burdovsky jumped into another carriage and
set off in pursuit; but it struck them as they drove along that it was
not much use trying to bring Nastasia back by force.

"Besides," said Burdovsky, "the prince would not like it, would he?" So
they gave up the pursuit.

Rogojin and Nastasia Philipovna reached the station just in time for the
train. As he jumped out of the carriage and was almost on the point
of entering the train, Rogojin accosted a young girl standing on the
platform and wearing an old-fashioned, but respectable-looking, black
cloak and a silk handkerchief over her head.

"Take fifty roubles for your cloak?" he shouted, holding the money
out to the girl. Before the astonished young woman could collect her
scattered senses, he pushed the money into her hand, seized the mantle,
and threw it and the handkerchief over Nastasia's head and shoulders.
The latter's wedding-array would have attracted too much attention, and
it was not until some time later that the girl understood why her old
cloak and kerchief had been bought at such a price.
