
The news of what had happened reached the church with extraordinary
rapidity. When Keller arrived, a host of people whom he did not know
thronged around to ask him questions. There was much excited talking,
and shaking of heads, even some laughter; but no one left the church,
all being anxious to observe how the now celebrated bridegroom would
take the news. He grew very pale upon hearing it, but took it quite
quietly.

"I was afraid," he muttered, scarcely audibly, "but I hardly thought it
would come to this." Then after a short silence, he added: "However, in
her state, it is quite consistent with the natural order of things."

Even Keller admitted afterwards that this was "extraordinarily
philosophical" on the prince's part. He left the church quite calm, to
all appearances, as many witnesses were found to declare afterwards. He
seemed anxious to reach home and be left alone as quickly as possible;
but this was not to be. He was accompanied by nearly all the invited
guests, and besides this, the house was almost besieged by excited bands
of people, who insisted upon being allowed to enter the verandah. The
prince heard Keller and Lebedeff remonstrating and quarrelling with
these unknown individuals, and soon went out himself. He approached
the disturbers of his peace, requested courteously to be told what was
desired; then politely putting Lebedeff and Keller aside, he addressed
an old gentleman who was standing on the verandah steps at the head of
the band of would-be guests, and courteously requested him to honour him
with a visit. The old fellow was quite taken aback by this, but entered,
followed by a few more, who tried to appear at their ease. The rest
remained outside, and presently the whole crowd was censuring those who
had accepted the invitation. The prince offered seats to his strange
visitors, tea was served, and a general conversation sprang up.
Everything was done most decorously, to the considerable surprise of the
intruders. A few tentative attempts were made to turn the conversation
to the events of the day, and a few indiscreet questions were asked; but
Muishkin replied to everybody with such simplicity and good-humour, and
at the same time with so much dignity, and showed such confidence in the
good breeding of his guests, that the indiscreet talkers were quickly
silenced. By degrees the conversation became almost serious. One
gentleman suddenly exclaimed, with great vehemence: "Whatever happens,
I shall not sell my property; I shall wait. Enterprise is better than
money, and there, sir, you have my whole system of economy, if you
wish!" He addressed the prince, who warmly commended his sentiments,
though Lebedeff whispered in his ear that this gentleman, who talked so
much of his "property," had never had either house or home.

Nearly an hour passed thus, and when tea was over the visitors seemed to
think that it was time to go. As they went out, the doctor and the old
gentleman bade Muishkin a warm farewell, and all the rest took their
leave with hearty protestations of good-will, dropping remarks to the
effect that "it was no use worrying," and that "perhaps all would turn
out for the best," and so on. Some of the younger intruders would have
asked for champagne, but they were checked by the older ones. When all
had departed, Keller leaned over to Lebedeff, and said:

"With you and me there would have been a scene. We should have shouted
and fought, and called in the police. But he has simply made some new
friends--and such friends, too! I know them!"

Lebedeff, who was slightly intoxicated, answered with a sigh:

"Things are hidden from the wise and prudent, and revealed unto babes.
I have applied those words to him before, but now I add that God has
preserved the babe himself from the abyss, He and all His saints."

At last, about half-past ten, the prince was left alone. His head ached.
Colia was the last to go, after having helped him to change his wedding
clothes. They parted on affectionate terms, and, without speaking of
what had happened, Colia promised to come very early the next day. He
said later that the prince had given no hint of his intentions when they
said good-bye, but had hidden them even from him. Soon there was hardly
anyone left in the house. Burdovsky had gone to see Hippolyte; Keller
and Lebedeff had wandered off together somewhere.

Only Vera Lebedeff remained hurriedly rearranging the furniture in
the rooms. As she left the verandah, she glanced at the prince. He was
seated at the table, with both elbows upon it, and his head resting
on his hands. She approached him, and touched his shoulder gently.
The prince started and looked at her in perplexity; he seemed to be
collecting his senses for a minute or so, before he could remember where
he was. As recollection dawned upon him, he became violently agitated.
All he did, however, was to ask Vera very earnestly to knock at his door
and awake him in time for the first train to Petersburg next morning.
Vera promised, and the prince entreated her not to tell anyone of his
intention. She promised this, too; and at last, when she had half-closed
the door, he called her back a third time, took her hands in his, kissed
them, then kissed her forehead, and in a rather peculiar manner said to
her, "Until tomorrow!"

Such was Vera's story afterwards.

She went away in great anxiety about him, but when she saw him in the
morning, he seemed to be quite himself again, greeted her with a smile,
and told her that he would very likely be back by the evening. It
appears that he did not consider it necessary to inform anyone excepting
Vera of his departure for town.

XI.

AN hour later he was in St. Petersburg, and by ten o'clock he had rung
the bell at Rogojin's.

He had gone to the front door, and was kept waiting a long while before
anyone came. At last the door of old Mrs. Rogojin's flat was opened, and
an aged servant appeared.

"Parfen Semionovitch is not at home," she announced from the doorway.
"Whom do you want?"

"Parfen Semionovitch."

"He is not in."

The old woman examined the prince from head to foot with great
curiosity.

"At all events tell me whether he slept at home last night, and whether
he came alone?"

The old woman continued to stare at him, but said nothing.

"Was not Nastasia Philipovna here with him, yesterday evening?"

"And, pray, who are you yourself?"

"Prince Lef Nicolaievitch Muishkin; he knows me well."

"He is not at home."

The woman lowered her eyes.

"And Nastasia Philipovna?"

"I know nothing about it."

"Stop a minute! When will he come back?"

"I don't know that either."

The door was shut with these words, and the old woman disappeared. The
prince decided to come back within an hour. Passing out of the house, he
met the porter.

"Is Parfen Semionovitch at home?" he asked.

"Yes."

"Why did they tell me he was not at home, then?" "Where did they tell
you so,--at his door?" "No, at his mother's flat; I rang at Parfen
Semionovitch's door and nobody came."

"Well, he may have gone out. I can't tell. Sometimes he takes the keys
with him, and leaves the rooms empty for two or three days."

"Do you know for certain that he was at home last night?"

"Yes, he was."

"Was Nastasia Philipovna with him?"

"I don't know; she doesn't come often. I think I should have known if
she had come."

The prince went out deep in thought, and walked up and down the pavement
for some time. The windows of all the rooms occupied by Rogojin were
closed, those of his mother's apartments were open. It was a hot, bright
day. The prince crossed the road in order to have a good look at the
windows again; not only were Rogojin's closed, but the white blinds were
all down as well.

He stood there for a minute and then, suddenly and strangely enough, it
seemed to him that a little corner of one of the blinds was lifted,
and Rogojin's face appeared for an instant and then vanished. He waited
another minute, and decided to go and ring the bell once more; however,
he thought better of it again and put it off for an hour.

The chief object in his mind at this moment was to get as quickly as
he could to Nastasia Philipovna's lodging. He remembered that, not long
since, when she had left Pavlofsk at his request, he had begged her
to put up in town at the house of a respectable widow, who had
well-furnished rooms to let, near the Ismailofsky barracks. Probably
Nastasia had kept the rooms when she came down to Pavlofsk this last
time; and most likely she would have spent the night in them, Rogojin
having taken her straight there from the station.

The prince took a droshky. It struck him as he drove on that he ought
to have begun by coming here, since it was most improbable that Rogojin
should have taken Nastasia to his own house last night. He remembered
that the porter said she very rarely came at all, so that it was still
less likely that she would have gone there so late at night.

Vainly trying to comfort himself with these reflections, the prince
reached the Ismailofsky barracks more dead than alive.

To his consternation the good people at the lodgings had not only heard
nothing of Nastasia, but all came out to look at him as if he were a
marvel of some sort. The whole family, of all ages, surrounded him, and
he was begged to enter. He guessed at once that they knew perfectly well
who he was, and that yesterday ought to have been his wedding-day; and
further that they were dying to ask about the wedding, and especially
about why he should be here now, inquiring for the woman who in all
reasonable human probability might have been expected to be with him in
Pavlofsk.

He satisfied their curiosity, in as few words as possible, with regard
to the wedding, but their exclamations and sighs were so numerous and
sincere that he was obliged to tell the whole story--in a short form,
of course. The advice of all these agitated ladies was that the prince
should go at once and knock at Rogojin's until he was let in: and when
let in insist upon a substantial explanation of everything. If Rogojin
was really not at home, the prince was advised to go to a certain house,
the address of which was given, where lived a German lady, a friend of
Nastasia Philipovna's. It was possible that she might have spent the
night there in her anxiety to conceal herself.

The prince rose from his seat in a condition of mental collapse. The
good ladies reported afterwards that "his pallor was terrible to see,
and his legs seemed to give way underneath him." With difficulty he was
made to understand that his new friends would be glad of his address, in
order to act with him if possible. After a moment's thought he gave the
address of the small hotel, on the stairs of which he had had a fit some
five weeks since. He then set off once more for Rogojin's.

This time they neither opened the door at Rogojin's flat nor at the one
opposite. The prince found the porter with difficulty, but when found,
the man would hardly look at him or answer his questions, pretending
to be busy. Eventually, however, he was persuaded to reply so far as to
state that Rogojin had left the house early in the morning and gone to
Pavlofsk, and that he would not return today at all.

"I shall wait; he may come back this evening."

"He may not be home for a week."

"Then, at all events, he DID sleep here, did he?"

"Well--he did sleep here, yes."

All this was suspicious and unsatisfactory. Very likely the porter had
received new instructions during the interval of the prince's absence;
his manner was so different now. He had been obliging--now he was as
obstinate and silent as a mule. However, the prince decided to call
again in a couple of hours, and after that to watch the house, in case
of need. His hope was that he might yet find Nastasia at the address
which he had just received. To that address he now set off at full
speed.

But alas! at the German lady's house they did not even appear to
understand what he wanted. After a while, by means of certain hints, he
was able to gather that Nastasia must have had a quarrel with her friend
two or three weeks ago, since which date the latter had neither heard
nor seen anything of her. He was given to understand that the subject of
Nastasia's present whereabouts was not of the slightest interest to her;
and that Nastasia might marry all the princes in the world for all she
cared! So Muishkin took his leave hurriedly. It struck him now that she
might have gone away to Moscow just as she had done the last time, and
that Rogojin had perhaps gone after her, or even WITH her. If only he
could find some trace!

However, he must take his room at the hotel; and he started off in that
direction. Having engaged his room, he was asked by the waiter whether
he would take dinner; replying mechanically in the affirmative, he sat
down and waited; but it was not long before it struck him that dining
would delay him. Enraged at this idea, he started up, crossed the
dark passage (which filled him with horrible impressions and gloomy
forebodings), and set out once more for Rogojin's. Rogojin had not
returned, and no one came to the door. He rang at the old lady's door
opposite, and was informed that Parfen Semionovitch would not return for
three days. The curiosity with which the old servant stared at him again
impressed the prince disagreeably. He could not find the porter this
time at all.

As before, he crossed the street and watched the windows from the other
side, walking up and down in anguish of soul for half an hour or so in
the stifling heat. Nothing stirred; the blinds were motionless; indeed,
the prince began to think that the apparition of Rogojin's face could
have been nothing but fancy. Soothed by this thought, he drove off once
more to his friends at the Ismailofsky barracks. He was expected
there. The mother had already been to three or four places to look for
Nastasia, but had not found a trace of any kind.

The prince said nothing, but entered the room, sat down silently, and
stared at them, one after the other, with the air of a man who cannot
understand what is being said to him. It was strange--one moment he
seemed to be so observant, the next so absent; his behaviour struck
all the family as most remarkable. At length he rose from his seat, and
begged to be shown Nastasia's rooms. The ladies reported afterwards how
he had examined everything in the apartments. He observed an open book
on the table, Madam Bovary, and requested the leave of the lady of the
house to take it with him. He had turned down the leaf at the open page,
and pocketed it before they could explain that it was a library book. He
had then seated himself by the open window, and seeing a card-table, he
asked who played cards.

He was informed that Nastasia used to play with Rogojin every evening,
either at "preference" or "little fool," or "whist"; that this had been
their practice since her last return from Pavlofsk; that she had taken
to this amusement because she did not like to see Rogojin sitting silent
and dull for whole evenings at a time; that the day after Nastasia had
made a remark to this effect, Rogojin had whipped a pack of cards out
of his pocket. Nastasia had laughed, but soon they began playing. The
prince asked where were the cards, but was told that Rogojin used to
bring a new pack every day, and always carried it away in his pocket.

The good ladies recommended the prince to try knocking at Rogojin's once
more--not at once, but in the evening Meanwhile, the mother would go to
Pavlofsk to inquire at Dana Alexeyevna's whether anything had been heard
of Nastasia there. The prince was to come back at ten o'clock and meet
her, to hear her news and arrange plans for the morrow.

In spite of the kindly-meant consolations of his new friends, the prince
walked to his hotel in inexpressible anguish of spirit, through the hot,
dusty streets, aimlessly staring at the faces of those who passed him.
Arrived at his destination, he determined to rest awhile in his room
before he started for Rogojin's once more. He sat down, rested his
elbows on the table and his head on his hands, and fell to thinking.

Heaven knows how long and upon what subjects he thought. He thought
of many things--of Vera Lebedeff, and of her father; of Hippolyte; of
Rogojin himself, first at the funeral, then as he had met him in the
park, then, suddenly, as they had met in this very passage, outside,
when Rogojin had watched in the darkness and awaited him with uplifted
knife. The prince remembered his enemy's eyes as they had glared at him
in the darkness. He shuddered, as a sudden idea struck him.

This idea was, that if Rogojin were in Petersburg, though he might hide
for a time, yet he was quite sure to come to him--the prince--before
long, with either good or evil intentions, but probably with the same
intention as on that other occasion. At all events, if Rogojin were to
come at all he would be sure to seek the prince here--he had no other
town address--perhaps in this same corridor; he might well seek him here
if he needed him. And perhaps he did need him. This idea seemed quite
natural to the prince, though he could not have explained why he should
so suddenly have become necessary to Rogojin. Rogojin would not come if
all were well with him, that was part of the thought; he would come if
all were not well; and certainly, undoubtedly, all would not be well
with him. The prince could not bear this new idea; he took his hat and
rushed out towards the street. It was almost dark in the passage.

"What if he were to come out of that corner as I go by and--and stop
me?" thought the prince, as he approached the familiar spot. But no one
came out.

He passed under the gateway and into the street. The crowds of people
walking about--as is always the case at sunset in Petersburg, during the
summer--surprised him, but he walked on in the direction of Rogojin's
house.

About fifty yards from the hotel, at the first cross-road, as he passed
through the crowd of foot-passengers sauntering along, someone touched
his shoulder, and said in a whisper into his ear:

"Lef Nicolaievitch, my friend, come along with me." It was Rogojin.

The prince immediately began to tell him, eagerly and joyfully, how he
had but the moment before expected to see him in the dark passage of the
hotel.

"I was there," said Rogojin, unexpectedly. "Come along." The prince was
surprised at this answer; but his astonishment increased a couple of
minutes afterwards, when he began to consider it. Having thought it
over, he glanced at Rogojin in alarm. The latter was striding along a
yard or so ahead, looking straight in front of him, and mechanically
making way for anyone he met.

"Why did you not ask for me at my room if you were in the hotel?" asked
the prince, suddenly.

Rogojin stopped and looked at him; then reflected, and replied as though
he had not heard the question:

"Look here, Lef Nicolaievitch, you go straight on to the house; I shall
walk on the other side. See that we keep together."

So saying, Rogojin crossed the road.

Arrived on the opposite pavement, he looked back to see whether the
prince were moving, waved his hand in the direction of the Gorohovaya,
and strode on, looking across every moment to see whether Muishkin
understood his instructions. The prince supposed that Rogojin desired to
look out for someone whom he was afraid to miss; but if so, why had he
not told HIM whom to look out for? So the two proceeded for half a mile
or so. Suddenly the prince began to tremble from some unknown cause. He
could not bear it, and signalled to Rogojin across the road.

The latter came at once.

"Is Nastasia Philipovna at your house?"

"Yes."

"And was it you looked out of the window under the blind this morning?"

"Yes."

"Then why did--"

But the prince could not finish his question; he did not know what to
say. Besides this, his heart was beating so that he found it difficult
to speak at all. Rogojin was silent also and looked at him as before,
with an expression of deep thoughtfulness.

"Well, I'm going," he said, at last, preparing to recross the road. "You
go along here as before; we will keep to different sides of the road;
it's better so, you'll see."

When they reached the Gorohovaya, and came near the house, the prince's
legs were trembling so that he could hardly walk. It was about ten
o'clock. The old lady's windows were open, as before; Rogojin's were
all shut, and in the darkness the white blinds showed whiter than ever.
Rogojin and the prince each approached the house on his respective side
of the road; Rogojin, who was on the near side, beckoned the prince
across. He went over to the doorway.

"Even the porter does not know that I have come home now. I told him,
and told them at my mother's too, that I was off to Pavlofsk," said
Rogojin, with a cunning and almost satisfied smile. "We'll go in quietly
and nobody will hear us."

He had the key in his hand. Mounting the staircase he turned and
signalled to the prince to go more softly; he opened the door very
quietly, let the prince in, followed him, locked the door behind him,
and put the key in his pocket.

"Come along," he whispered.

He had spoken in a whisper all the way. In spite of his apparent outward
composure, he was evidently in a state of great mental agitation.
Arrived in a large salon, next to the study, he went to the window and
cautiously beckoned the prince up to him.

"When you rang the bell this morning I thought it must be you. I went to
the door on tip-toe and heard you talking to the servant opposite. I had
told her before that if anyone came and rang--especially you, and I gave
her your name--she was not to tell about me. Then I thought, what if
he goes and stands opposite and looks up, or waits about to watch the
house? So I came to this very window, looked out, and there you were
staring straight at me. That's how it came about."

"Where is Nastasia Philipovna?" asked the prince, breathlessly.

"She's here," replied Rogojin, slowly, after a slight pause.

"Where?"

Rogojin raised his eyes and gazed intently at the prince.

"Come," he said.

He continued to speak in a whisper, very deliberately as before, and
looked strangely thoughtful and dreamy. Even while he told the story of
how he had peeped through the blind, he gave the impression of wishing
to say something else. They entered the study. In this room some changes
had taken place since the prince last saw it. It was now divided into
two equal parts by a heavy green silk curtain stretched across it,
separating the alcove beyond, where stood Rogojin's bed, from the rest
of the room.

The heavy curtain was drawn now, and it was very dark. The bright
Petersburg summer nights were already beginning to close in, and but for
the full moon, it would have been difficult to distinguish anything in
Rogojin's dismal room, with the drawn blinds. They could just see one
anothers faces, however, though not in detail. Rogojin's face was white,
as usual. His glittering eyes watched the prince with an intent stare.

"Had you not better light a candle?" said Muishkin.

"No, I needn't," replied Rogojin, and taking the other by the hand he
drew him down to a chair. He himself took a chair opposite and drew it
up so close that he almost pressed against the prince's knees. At their
side was a little round table.

"Sit down," said Rogojin; "let's rest a bit." There was silence for a
moment.

"I knew you would be at that hotel," he continued, just as men sometimes
commence a serious conversation by discussing any outside subject before
leading up to the main point. "As I entered the passage it struck me
that perhaps you were sitting and waiting for me, just as I was waiting
for you. Have you been to the old lady at Ismailofsky barracks?"

"Yes," said the prince, squeezing the word out with difficulty owing to
the dreadful beating of his heart.

"I thought you would. 'They'll talk about it,' I thought; so I
determined to go and fetch you to spend the night here--'We will be
together,' I thought, 'for this one night--'"

"Rogojin, WHERE is Nastasia Philipovna?" said the prince, suddenly
rising from his seat. He was quaking in all his limbs, and his words
came in a scarcely audible whisper. Rogojin rose also.

"There," he whispered, nodding his head towards the curtain.

"Asleep?" whispered the prince.

Rogojin looked intently at him again, as before.

"Let's go in--but you mustn't--well--let's go in."

He lifted the curtain, paused--and turned to the prince. "Go in," he
said, motioning him to pass behind the curtain. Muishkin went in.

"It's so dark," he said.

"You can see quite enough," muttered Rogojin.

"I can just see there's a bed--"

"Go nearer," suggested Rogojin, softly.

The prince took a step forward--then another--and paused. He stood and
stared for a minute or two.

Neither of the men spoke a word while at the bedside. The prince's heart
beat so loud that its knocking seemed to be distinctly audible in the
deathly silence.

But now his eyes had become so far accustomed to the darkness that he
could distinguish the whole of the bed. Someone was asleep upon
it--in an absolutely motionless sleep. Not the slightest movement was
perceptible, not the faintest breathing could be heard. The sleeper
was covered with a white sheet; the outline of the limbs was hardly
distinguishable. He could only just make out that a human being lay
outstretched there.

All around, on the bed, on a chair beside it, on the floor, were
scattered the different portions of a magnificent white silk dress, bits
of lace, ribbons and flowers. On a small table at the bedside glittered
a mass of diamonds, torn off and thrown down anyhow. From under a heap
of lace at the end of the bed peeped a small white foot, which looked as
though it had been chiselled out of marble; it was terribly still.

The prince gazed and gazed, and felt that the more he gazed the more
death-like became the silence. Suddenly a fly awoke somewhere, buzzed
across the room, and settled on the pillow. The prince shuddered.

"Let's go," said Rogojin, touching his shoulder. They left the alcove
and sat down in the two chairs they had occupied before, opposite to one
another. The prince trembled more and more violently, and never took his
questioning eyes off Rogojin's face.

"I see you are shuddering, Lef Nicolaievitch," said the latter, at
length, "almost as you did once in Moscow, before your fit; don't you
remember? I don't know what I shall do with you--"

The prince bent forward to listen, putting all the strain he could
muster upon his understanding in order to take in what Rogojin said, and
continuing to gaze at the latter's face.

"Was it you?" he muttered, at last, motioning with his head towards the
curtain.

"Yes, it was I," whispered Rogojin, looking down.

Neither spoke for five minutes.

"Because, you know," Rogojin recommenced, as though continuing a former
sentence, "if you were ill now, or had a fit, or screamed, or anything,
they might hear it in the yard, or even in the street, and guess that
someone was passing the night in the house. They would all come and
knock and want to come in, because they know I am not at home. I didn't
light a candle for the same reason. When I am not here--for two or
three days at a time, now and then--no one comes in to tidy the house
or anything; those are my orders. So that I want them to not know we are
spending the night here--"

"Wait," interrupted the prince. "I asked both the porter and the woman
whether Nastasia Philipovna had spent last night in the house; so they
knew--"

"I know you asked. I told them that she had called in for ten minutes,
and then gone straight back to Pavlofsk. No one knows she slept here.
Last night we came in just as carefully as you and I did today. I
thought as I came along with her that she would not like to creep in so
secretly, but I was quite wrong. She whispered, and walked on tip-toe;
she carried her skirt over her arm, so that it shouldn't rustle, and
she held up her finger at me on the stairs, so that I shouldn't make
a noise--it was you she was afraid of. She was mad with terror in the
train, and she begged me to bring her to this house. I thought of taking
her to her rooms at the Ismailofsky barracks first; but she wouldn't
hear of it. She said, 'No--not there; he'll find me out at once there.
Take me to your own house, where you can hide me, and tomorrow we'll set
off for Moscow.' Thence she would go to Orel, she said. When she went to
bed, she was still talking about going to Orel."

"Wait! What do you intend to do now, Parfen?"

"Well, I'm afraid of you. You shudder and tremble so. We'll pass the
night here together. There are no other beds besides that one; but I've
thought how we'll manage. I'll take the cushions off all the sofas, and
lay them down on the floor, up against the curtain here--for you and
me--so that we shall be together. For if they come in and look about
now, you know, they'll find her, and carry her away, and they'll be
asking me questions, and I shall say I did it, and then they'll take me
away, too, don't you see? So let her lie close to us--close to you and
me.

"Yes, yes," agreed the prince, warmly.

"So we will not say anything about it, or let them take her away?"

"Not for anything!" cried the other; "no, no, no!"

"So I had decided, my friend; not to give her up to anyone," continued
Rogojin. "We'll be very quiet. I have only been out of the house one
hour all day, all the rest of the time I have been with her. I dare say
the air is very bad here. It is so hot. Do you find it bad?"

"I don't know--perhaps--by morning it will be."

"I've covered her with oil-cloth--best American oilcloth, and put
the sheet over that, and four jars of disinfectant, on account of the
smell--as they did at Moscow--you remember? And she's lying so still;
you shall see, in the morning, when it's light. What! can't you get up?"
asked Rogojin, seeing the other was trembling so that he could not rise
from his seat.

"My legs won't move," said the prince; "it's fear, I know. When my fear
is over, I'll get up--"

"Wait a bit--I'll make the bed, and you can lie down. I'll lie down,
too, and we'll listen and watch, for I don't know yet what I shall do...
I tell you beforehand, so that you may be ready in case I--"

Muttering these disconnected words, Rogojin began to make up the beds.
It was clear that he had devised these beds long before; last night he
slept on the sofa. But there was no room for two on the sofa, and he
seemed anxious that he and the prince should be close to one another;
therefore, he now dragged cushions of all sizes and shapes from the
sofas, and made a sort of bed of them close by the curtain. He then
approached the prince, and gently helped him to rise, and led him
towards the bed. But the prince could now walk by himself, so that his
fear must have passed; for all that, however, he continued to shudder.

"It's hot weather, you see," continued Rogojin, as he lay down on the
cushions beside Muishkin, "and, naturally, there will be a smell. I
daren't open the window. My mother has some beautiful flowers in pots;
they have a delicious scent; I thought of fetching them in, but that old
servant will find out, she's very inquisitive.

"Yes, she is inquisitive," assented the prince.

"I thought of buying flowers, and putting them all round her; but I was
afraid it would make us sad to see her with flowers round her."

"Look here," said the prince; he was bewildered, and his brain wandered.
He seemed to be continually groping for the questions he wished to ask,
and then losing them. "Listen--tell me--how did you--with a knife?--That
same one?"

"Yes, that same one."

"Wait a minute, I want to ask you something else, Parfen; all sorts of
things; but tell me first, did you intend to kill her before my wedding,
at the church door, with your knife?"

"I don't know whether I did or not," said Rogojin, drily, seeming to be
a little astonished at the question, and not quite taking it in.

"Did you never take your knife to Pavlofsk with you?" "No. As to the
knife," he added, "this is all I can tell you about it." He was silent
for a moment, and then said, "I took it out of the locked drawer this
morning about three, for it was in the early morning all this--happened.
It has been inside the book ever since--and--and--this is what is such
a marvel to me, the knife only went in a couple of inches at most, just
under her left breast, and there wasn't more than half a tablespoonful
of blood altogether, not more."

"Yes--yes--yes--" The prince jumped up in extraordinary agitation.
"I know, I know, I've read of that sort of thing--it's internal
haemorrhage, you know. Sometimes there isn't a drop--if the blow goes
straight to the heart--"

"Wait--listen!" cried Rogojin, suddenly, starting up. "Somebody's
walking about, do you hear? In the hall." Both sat up to listen.

"I hear," said the prince in a whisper, his eyes fixed on Rogojin.

"Footsteps?"

"Yes."

"Shall we shut the door, and lock it, or not?"

"Yes, lock it."

They locked the door, and both lay down again. There was a long silence.

"Yes, by-the-by," whispered the prince, hurriedly and excitedly as
before, as though he had just seized hold of an idea and was afraid of
losing it again. "I--I wanted those cards! They say you played cards
with her?"

"Yes, I played with her," said Rogojin, after a short silence.

"Where are the cards?"

"Here they are," said Rogojin, after a still longer pause.

He pulled out a pack of cards, wrapped in a bit of paper, from his
pocket, and handed them to the prince. The latter took them, with a sort
of perplexity. A new, sad, helpless feeling weighed on his heart; he had
suddenly realized that not only at this moment, but for a long while,
he had not been saying what he wanted to say, had not been acting as he
wanted to act; and that these cards which he held in his hand, and which
he had been so delighted to have at first, were now of no use--no use...
He rose, and wrung his hands. Rogojin lay motionless, and seemed neither
to hear nor see his movements; but his eyes blazed in the darkness, and
were fixed in a wild stare.

The prince sat down on a chair, and watched him in alarm. Half an hour
went by.

Suddenly Rogojin burst into a loud abrupt laugh, as though he had quite
forgotten that they must speak in whispers.

"That officer, eh!--that young officer--don't you remember that fellow
at the band? Eh? Ha, ha, ha! Didn't she whip him smartly, eh?"

The prince jumped up from his seat in renewed terror. When Rogojin
quieted down (which he did at once) the prince bent over him, sat down
beside him, and with painfully beating heart and still more painful
breath, watched his face intently. Rogojin never turned his head, and
seemed to have forgotten all about him. The prince watched and waited.
Time went on--it began to grow light.

Rogojin began to wander--muttering disconnectedly; then he took to
shouting and laughing. The prince stretched out a trembling hand and
gently stroked his hair and his cheeks--he could do nothing more. His
legs trembled again and he seemed to have lost the use of them. A
new sensation came over him, filling his heart and soul with infinite
anguish.

Meanwhile the daylight grew full and strong; and at last the prince
lay down, as though overcome by despair, and laid his face against the
white, motionless face of Rogojin. His tears flowed on to Rogojin's
cheek, though he was perhaps not aware of them himself.

At all events when, after many hours, the door was opened and people
thronged in, they found the murderer unconscious and in a raging fever.
The prince was sitting by him, motionless, and each time that the sick
man gave a laugh, or a shout, he hastened to pass his own trembling hand
over his companion's hair and cheeks, as though trying to soothe and
quiet him. But alas I he understood nothing of what was said to him, and
recognized none of those who surrounded him.

If Schneider himself had arrived then and seen his former pupil and
patient, remembering the prince's condition during the first year in
Switzerland, he would have flung up his hands, despairingly, and cried,
as he did then:

"An idiot!"

XII.

WHEN the widow hurried away to Pavlofsk, she went straight to Daria
Alexeyevna's house, and telling all she knew, threw her into a state of
great alarm. Both ladies decided to communicate at once with Lebedeff,
who, as the friend and landlord of the prince, was also much agitated.
Vera Lebedeff told all she knew, and by Lebedeff's advice it was decided
that all three should go to Petersburg as quickly as possible, in order
to avert "what might so easily happen."

This is how it came about that at eleven o'clock next morning Rogojin's
flat was opened by the police in the presence of Lebedeff, the two
ladies, and Rogojin's own brother, who lived in the wing.

The evidence of the porter went further than anything else towards the
success of Lebedeff in gaining the assistance of the police. He declared
that he had seen Rogojin return to the house last night, accompanied by
a friend, and that both had gone upstairs very secretly and cautiously.
After this there was no hesitation about breaking open the door, since
it could not be got open in any other way.

Rogojin suffered from brain fever for two months. When he recovered from
the attack he was at once brought up on trial for murder.

He gave full, satisfactory, and direct evidence on every point; and the
prince's name was, thanks to this, not brought into the proceedings.
Rogojin was very quiet during the progress of the trial. He did not
contradict his clever and eloquent counsel, who argued that the brain
fever, or inflammation of the brain, was the cause of the crime;
clearly proving that this malady had existed long before the murder was
perpetrated, and had been brought on by the sufferings of the accused.

But Rogojin added no words of his own in confirmation of this view, and
as before, he recounted with marvellous exactness the details of
his crime. He was convicted, but with extenuating circumstances, and
condemned to hard labour in Siberia for fifteen years. He heard his
sentence grimly, silently, and thoughtfully. His colossal fortune, with
the exception of the comparatively small portion wasted in the first
wanton period of his inheritance, went to his brother, to the great
satisfaction of the latter.

The old lady, Rogojin's mother, is still alive, and remembers her
favourite son Parfen sometimes, but not clearly. God spared her the
knowledge of this dreadful calamity which had overtaken her house.

Lebedeff, Keller, Gania, Ptitsin, and many other friends of ours
continue to live as before. There is scarcely any change in them, so
that there is no need to tell of their subsequent doings.

Hippolyte died in great agitation, and rather sooner than he expected,
about a fortnight after Nastasia Philpovna's death. Colia was much
affected by these events, and drew nearer to his mother in heart and
sympathy. Nina Alexandrovna is anxious, because he is "thoughtful beyond
his years," but he will, we think, make a useful and active man.

The prince's further fate was more or less decided by Colia, who
selected, out of all the persons he had met during the last six or seven
months, Evgenie Pavlovitch, as friend and confidant. To him he made over
all that he knew as to the events above recorded, and as to the present
condition of the prince. He was not far wrong in his choice. Evgenie
Pavlovitch took the deepest interest in the fate of the unfortunate
"idiot," and, thanks to his influence, the prince found himself once
more with Dr. Schneider, in Switzerland.

Evgenie Pavlovitch, who went abroad at this time, intending to live a
long while on the continent, being, as he often said, quite superfluous
in Russia, visits his sick friend at Schneider's every few months.

But Dr. Schneider frowns ever more and more and shakes his head; he
hints that the brain is fatally injured; he does not as yet declare that
his patient is incurable, but he allows himself to express the gravest
fears.

Evgenie takes this much to heart, and he has a heart, as is proved
by the fact that he receives and even answers letters from Colia. But
besides this, another trait in his character has become apparent, and as
it is a good trait we will make haste to reveal it. After each visit
to Schneider's establishment, Evgenie Pavlovitch writes another letter,
besides that to Colia, giving the most minute particulars concerning the
invalid's condition. In these letters is to be detected, and in each one
more than the last, a growing feeling of friendship and sympathy.

The individual who corresponds thus with Evgenie Pavlovitch, and who
engages so much of his attention and respect, is Vera Lebedeff. We have
never been able to discover clearly how such relations sprang up.
Of course the root of them was in the events which we have already
recorded, and which so filled Vera with grief on the prince's account
that she fell seriously ill. But exactly how the acquaintance and
friendship came about, we cannot say.

We have spoken of these letters chiefly because in them is often to be
found some news of the Epanchin family, and of Aglaya in particular.
Evgenie Pavlovitch wrote of her from Paris, that after a short and
sudden attachment to a certain Polish count, an exile, she had suddenly
married him, quite against the wishes of her parents, though they had
eventually given their consent through fear of a terrible scandal.
Then, after a six months' silence, Evgenie Pavlovitch informed his
correspondent, in a long letter, full of detail, that while paying his
last visit to Dr. Schneider's establishment, he had there come across
the whole Epanchin family (excepting the general, who had remained in
St. Petersburg) and Prince S. The meeting was a strange one. They
all received Evgenie Pavlovitch with effusive delight; Adelaida and
Alexandra were deeply grateful to him for his "angelic kindness to the
unhappy prince."

Lizabetha Prokofievna, when she saw poor Muishkin, in his enfeebled and
humiliated condition, had wept bitterly. Apparently all was forgiven
him.

Prince S. had made a few just and sensible remarks. It seemed to Evgenie
Pavlovitch that there was not yet perfect harmony between Adelaida and
her fiance, but he thought that in time the impulsive young girl would
let herself be guided by his reason and experience. Besides, the recent
events that had befallen her family had given Adelaida much to think
about, especially the sad experiences of her younger sister. Within six
months, everything that the family had dreaded from the marriage with
the Polish count had come to pass. He turned out to be neither count
nor exile--at least, in the political sense of the word--but had had to
leave his native land owing to some rather dubious affair of the past.
It was his noble patriotism, of which he made a great display, that
had rendered him so interesting in Aglaya's eyes. She was so fascinated
that, even before marrying him, she joined a committee that had been
organized abroad to work for the restoration of Poland; and further,
she visited the confessional of a celebrated Jesuit priest, who made an
absolute fanatic of her. The supposed fortune of the count had dwindled
to a mere nothing, although he had given almost irrefutable evidence of
its existence to Lizabetha Prokofievna and Prince S.

Besides this, before they had been married half a year, the count and
his friend the priest managed to bring about a quarrel between Aglaya
and her family, so that it was now several months since they had seen
her. In a word, there was a great deal to say; but Mrs. Epanchin, and
her daughters, and even Prince S., were still so much distressed by
Aglaya's latest infatuations and adventures, that they did hot care to
talk of them, though they must have known that Evgenie knew much of the
story already.

Poor Lizabetha Prokofievna was most anxious to get home, and, according
to Evgenie's account, she criticized everything foreign with much
hostility.

"They can't bake bread anywhere, decently; and they all freeze in their
houses, during winter, like a lot of mice in a cellar. At all events,
I've had a good Russian cry over this poor fellow," she added, pointing
to the prince, who had not recognized her in the slightest degree.
"So enough of this nonsense; it's time we faced the truth. All this
continental life, all this Europe of yours, and all the trash about
'going abroad' is simply foolery, and it is mere foolery on our part
to come. Remember what I say, my friend; you'll live to agree with me
yourself."

So spoke the good lady, almost angrily, as she took leave of Evgenie
Pavlovitch.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Idiot, by 
(AKA Feodor Dostoevsky) Fyodor Dostoyevsky

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IDIOT ***

***** This file should be named 2638.txt or 2638.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/3/2638/

Produced by Martin Adamson

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Facts Concerning The Recent Carnival Of
Crime In Connecticut, by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Facts Concerning The Recent Carnival Of Crime In Connecticut

Author: Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

Last Updated: February 16, 2009
Release Date: August 19, 2006 [EBook #3183]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CARNIVAL OF CRIME ***



Produced by David Widger





THE FACTS CONCERNING THE RECENT CARNIVAL OF CRIME IN CONNECTICUT

by Mark Twain



I was feeling blithe, almost jocund. I put a match to my cigar, and
just then the morning's mail was handed in. The first superscription I
glanced at was in a handwriting that sent a thrill of pleasure through
and through me. It was Aunt Mary's; and she was the person I loved and
honored most in all the world, outside of my own household. She had been
my boyhood's idol; maturity, which is fatal to so many enchantments,
had not been able to dislodge her from her pedestal; no, it had only
justified her right to be there, and placed her dethronement permanently
among the impossibilities. To show how strong her influence over me was,
I will observe that long after everybody else's "do-stop-smoking" had
ceased to affect me in the slightest degree, Aunt Mary could still stir
my torpid conscience into faint signs of life when she touched upon the
matter. But all things have their limit in this world. A happy day came
at last, when even Aunt Mary's words could no longer move me. I was
not merely glad to see that day arrive; I was more than glad--I was
grateful; for when its sun had set, the one alloy that was able to mar
my enjoyment of my aunt's society was gone. The remainder of her stay
with us that winter was in every way a delight. Of course she pleaded
with me just as earnestly as ever, after that blessed day, to quit my
pernicious habit, but to no purpose whatever; the moment she opened
the subject I at once became calmly, peacefully, contentedly
indifferent--absolutely, adamantinely indifferent. Consequently the
closing weeks of that memorable visit melted away as pleasantly as a
dream, they were so freighted for me with tranquil satisfaction. I could
not have enjoyed my pet vice more if my gentle tormentor had been a
smoker herself, and an advocate of the practice. Well, the sight of her
handwriting reminded me that I way getting very hungry to see her again.
I easily guessed what I should find in her letter. I opened it. Good!
just as I expected; she was coming! Coming this very day, too, and by
the morning train; I might expect her any moment.

I said to myself, "I am thoroughly happy and content now. If my most
pitiless enemy could appear before me at this moment, I would freely
right any wrong I may have done him."

Straightway the door opened, and a shriveled, shabby dwarf entered. He
was not more than two feet high. He seemed to be about forty years old.
Every feature and every inch of him was a trifle out of shape; and so,
while one could not put his finger upon any particular part and say,
"This is a conspicuous deformity," the spectator perceived that this
little person was a deformity as a whole--a vague, general, evenly
blended, nicely adjusted deformity. There was a fox-like cunning in the
face and the sharp little eyes, and also alertness and malice. And
yet, this vile bit of human rubbish seemed to bear a sort of remote
and ill-defined resemblance to me! It was dully perceptible in the
