expensive buttons. On the other hand, whatever his age, he will have
some respect to his profession and position in society. He will remember
how much the appearance of the man aids a judgment of his character, and
this test, which has often been cried down, is in reality no bad one;
for a man who does not dress appropriately evinces a want of what is
most necessary to professional men--tact and discretion.

“Position in society demands appropriateness. Well knowing the worldly
value of a good coat, I would yet never recommend a man of limited means
to aspire to a fashionable appearance. In the first place, he becomes
thereby a walking falsehood; in the second, he cannot, without running
into debt, which is another term for dishonesty, maintain the style he
has adopted. As he cannot afford to change his suits as rapidly as
fashion alters, he must avoid following it in varying details. He will
rush into wide sleeves one month, in the hope of being fashionable, and
before his coat is worn out, the next month will bring in a narrow
sleeve. We cannot, unfortunately, like Samuel Pepys, take a long cloak
now-a-days to the tailor’s, to be cut into a short one, ‘long cloaks
being now quite out,’ as he tells us. Even when there is no poverty in
the case, our position must not be forgotten. The tradesman will win
neither customers nor friends by adorning himself in the mode of the
club-lounger, and the clerk, or commercial traveler, who dresses
fashionably, lays himself open to inquiries as to his antecedents, which
he may not care to have investigated. In general, it may be said that
there is vulgarity in dressing like those of a class above us, since it
must be taken as a proof of pretension.

“As it is bad taste to flaunt the airs of the town among the
provincials, who know nothing of them, it is worse taste to display the
dress of a city in the quiet haunts of the rustics. The law, that all
attempts at distinction by means of dress is vulgar and pretentious,
would be sufficient argument against wearing city fashions in the
country.

“While in most cases a rougher and easier mode of dress is both
admissible and desirable in the country, there are many occasions of
country visiting where a town man finds it difficult to decide. It is
almost peculiar to the country to unite the amusements of the daytime
with those of the evening; of the open air with those of the
drawing-room. Thus, in the summer, when the days are long, you will be
asked to a pic-nic or an archery party, which will wind up with dancing
in-doors, and may even assume the character of a ball. If you are aware
of this beforehand, it will always be safe to send your evening dress to
your host’s house, and you will learn from the servants whether others
have done the same, and whether, therefore, you will not be singular in
asking leave to change your costume. But if you are ignorant how the day
is to end, you must be guided partly by the hour of invitation, and
partly by the extent of your intimacy with the family. I have actually
known gentlemen arrive at a large pic-nic at mid-day in complete evening
dress, and pitied them with all my heart, compelled as they were to
suffer, in tight black clothes, under a hot sun for eight hours, and
dance after all in the same dress. On the other hand, if you are asked
to come an hour or two before sunset, after six in summer, in the autumn
after five, you cannot err by appearing in evening dress. It is always
taken as a compliment to do so, and if your acquaintance with your
hostess is slight, it would be almost a familiarity to do otherwise. In
any case you desire to avoid singularity, so that if you can discover
what others who are invited intend to wear, you can always decide on
your own attire. In Europe there is a convenient rule for these matters;
never appear after four in the afternoon in morning dress; but then gray
trousers are there allowed instead of black, and white waistcoats are
still worn in the evening. At any rate, it is possible to effect a
compromise between the two styles of costume, and if you are likely to
be called upon to dance in the evening, it will be well to wear thin
boots, a black frock-coat, and a small black neck-tie, and to put a pair
of clean white gloves in your pocket. You will thus be at least less
conspicuous in the dancing-room than in a light tweed suit.

“Not so the distinction to be made according to size. As a rule, tall
men require long clothes--some few perhaps even in the nurse’s sense of
those words--and short men short clothes. On the other hand, Falstaff
should beware of Jenny Wren coats and affect ample wrappers, while Peter
Schlemihl, and the whole race of thin men, must eschew looseness as
much in their garments as their morals.

“Lastly we come to what is appropriate to different occasions, and as
this is an important subject, I shall treat of it separately. For the
present it is sufficient to point out that, while every man should avoid
not only extravagance, but even brilliance of dress on ordinary
occasions, there are some on which he may and ought to pay more
attention to his toilet, and attempt to look gay. Of course, the
evenings are not here meant. For evening dress there is a fixed rule,
from which we can depart only to be foppish or vulgar; but in morning
dress there is greater liberty, and when we undertake to mingle with
those who are assembled avowedly for gayety, we should not make
ourselves remarkable by the dinginess of our dress. Such occasions are
open air entertainments, _fêtes_, flower-shows, archery-meetings,
_matinées_, and _id genus omne_, where much of the pleasure to be
derived depends on the general effect on the enjoyers, and where, if we
cannot pump up a look of mirth, we should, at least, if we go at all,
wear the semblance of it in our dress. I have a worthy little friend,
who, I believe, is as well disposed to his kind as Lord Shaftesbury
himself, but who, for some reason, perhaps a twinge of philosophy about
him, frequents the gay meetings to which he is asked in an old coat and
a wide-awake. Some people take him for a wit, but he soon shows that he
does not aspire to that character; others for a philosopher, but he is
too good-mannered for that; others, poor man! pronounce him a cynic, and
all are agreed that whatever he may be, he looks out of place, and
spoils the general effect. I believe, in my heart, that he is the
mildest of men, but will not take the trouble to dress more than once a
day. At any rate, he has a character for eccentricity, which, I am sure,
is precisely what he would wish to avoid. That character is a most
delightful one for a bachelor, and it is generally Cœlebs who holds it,
for it has been proved by statistics that there are four single to one
married man among the inhabitants of our madhouses; but eccentricity
yields a reputation which requires something to uphold it, and even in
Diogenes of the Tub it was extremely bad taste to force himself into
Plato’s evening party without sandals, and nothing but a dirty tunic on
him.

“Another requisite in dress is its simplicity, with which I may couple
harmony of color. This simplicity is the only distinction which a man of
taste should aspire to in the matter of dress, but a simplicity in
appearance must proceed from a nicety in reality. One should not be
simply ill-dressed, but simply well-dressed. Lord Castlereagh would
never have been pronounced the most distinguished man in the gay court
of Vienna, because he wore no orders or ribbons among hundreds decorated
with a profusion of those vanities, but because besides this he was
dressed with taste. The charm of Brummell’s dress was its simplicity;
yet it cost him as much thought, time, and care as the portfolio of a
minister. The rules of simplicity, therefore, are the rules of taste.
All extravagance, all splendor, and all profusion must be avoided. The
colors, in the first place, must harmonize both with our complexion and
with one another; perhaps most of all with the color of our hair. All
bright colors should be avoided, such as red, yellow, sky-blue, and
bright green. Perhaps only a successful Australian gold digger would
think of choosing such colors for his coat, waistcoat, or trousers; but
there are hundreds of young men who might select them for their gloves
and neck-ties. The deeper colors are, some how or other, more manly, and
are certainly less striking. The same simplicity should be studied in
the avoidance of ornamentation. A few years ago it was the fashion to
trim the evening waistcoat with a border of gold lace. This is an
example of fashions always to be rebelled against. Then, too,
extravagance in the form of our dress is a sin against taste. I remember
that long ribbons took the place of neck-ties some years ago. At a
commemoration, two friends of mine determined to cut a figure in this
matter, having little else to distinguish them. The one wore two yards
of bright pink; the other the same quantity of bright blue ribbon, round
their necks. I have reason to believe they think now that they both
looked superbly ridiculous. In the same way, if the trousers are worn
wide, we should not wear them as loose as a Turk’s; or, if the sleeves
are to be open, we should not rival the ladies in this matter. And so on
through a hundred details, generally remembering that to exaggerate a
fashion is to assume a character, and therefore vulgar. The wearing of
jewelry comes under this head. Jewels are an ornament to women, but a
blemish to men. They bespeak either effeminacy or a love of display. The
hand of a man is honored in working, for labor is his mission; and the
hand that wears its riches on its fingers, has rarely worked honestly
to win them. The best jewel a man can wear is his honor. Let that be
bright and shining, well set in prudence, and all others must darken
before it. But as we are savages, and must have some silly trickery to
hang about us, a little, but very little concession may be made to our
taste in this respect. I am quite serious when I disadvise you from the
use of nose-rings, gold anklets, and hat-bands studded with jewels; for
when I see an incredulous young man of the nineteenth century, dangling
from his watch-chain a dozen silly ‘charms’ (often the only ones he
possesses), which have no other use than to give a fair coquette a
legitimate subject on which to approach to closer intimacy, and which
are revived from the lowest superstitions of dark ages, and sometimes
darker races, I am quite justified in believing that some South African
chieftain, sufficiently rich to cut a dash, might introduce with success
the most peculiar fashions of his own country. However this may be,
there are already sufficient extravagances prevalent among our young men
to attack.

“The man of good taste will wear as little jewelry as possible. One
handsome signet-ring on the little finger of the left hand, a scarf-pin
which is neither large, nor showy, nor too intricate in its design, and
a light, rather thin watch-guard with a cross-bar, are all that he ought
to wear. But, if he aspires to more than this, he should observe the
following rules:--

“1. Let everything be real and good. False jewelry is not only a
practical lie, but an absolute vulgarity, since its use arises from an
attempt to appear richer or grander than its wearer is.

“2. Let it be simple. Elaborate studs, waistcoat-buttons, and
wrist-links, are all abominable. The last, particularly, should be as
plain as possible, consisting of plain gold ovals, with, at most, the
crest engraved upon them. Diamonds and brilliants are quite unsuitable
to men, whose jewelry should never be conspicuous. If you happen to
possess a single diamond of great value you may wear it on great
occasions as a ring, but no more than one ring should ever be worn by a
gentleman.

“3. Let it be distinguished rather by its curiosity than its brilliance.
An antique or bit of old jewelry possesses more interest, particularly
if you are able to tell its history, than the most splendid production
of the goldsmith’s shop.

“4. Let it harmonize with the colors of your dress.

“5. Let it have some use. Men should never, like women, wear jewels for
mere ornament, whatever may be the fashion of Hungarian noblemen, and
deposed Indian rajahs with jackets covered with rubies.

“The precious stones are reserved for ladies, and even our scarf-pins
are more suitable without them.

“The dress that is both appropriate and simple can never offend, nor
render its wearer conspicuous, though it may distinguish him for his
good taste. But it will not be pleasing unless clean and fresh. We
cannot quarrel with a poor gentleman’s thread-bare coat, if his linen be
pure, and we see that he has never attempted to dress beyond his means
or unsuitably to his station. But the sight of decayed gentility and
dilapidated fashion may call forth our pity, and, at the same time
prompt a moral: ‘You have evidently sunken;’ we say to ourselves; ‘But
whose fault was it? Am I not led to suppose that the extravagance which
you evidently once revelled in has brought you to what I now see you?’
While freshness is essential to being well-dressed, it will be a
consolation to those who cannot afford a heavy tailor’s bill, to reflect
that a visible newness in one’s clothes is as bad as patches and darns,
and to remember that there have been celebrated dressers who would never
put on a new coat till it had been worn two or three times by their
valets. On the other hand, there is no excuse for untidiness, holes in
the boots, a broken hat, torn gloves, and so on. Indeed, it is better to
wear no gloves at all than a pair full of holes. There is nothing to be
ashamed of in bare hands, if they are clean, and the poor can still
afford to have their shirts and shoes mended, and their hats ironed. It
is certainly better to show signs of neatness than the reverse, and you
need sooner be ashamed of a hole than a darn.

“Of personal cleanliness I have spoken at such length that little need
be said on that of the clothes. If you are economical with your tailor,
you can be extravagant with your laundress. The beaux of forty years
back put on three shirts a day, but except in hot weather one is
sufficient. Of course, if you change your dress in the evening you must
change your shirt too. There has been a great outcry against colored
flannel shirts in the place of linen, and the man who can wear one for
three days is looked on as little better than St. Simeon Stylites. I
should like to know how often the advocates of linen change their own
under-flannel, and whether the same rule does not apply to what is seen
as to what is concealed. But while the flannel is perhaps healthier as
absorbing the moisture more rapidly, the linen has the advantage of
_looking_ cleaner, and may therefore be preferred. As to economy, if the
flannel costs less to wash, it also wears out sooner; but, be this as it
may, a man’s wardrobe is not complete without half a dozen or so of
these shirts, which he will find most useful, and ten times more
comfortable than linen in long excursions, or when exertion will be
required. Flannel, too, has the advantage of being warm in winter and
cool in summer, for, being a non-conductor, but a retainer of heat, it
protects the body from the sun, and, on the other hand, shields it from
the cold. But the best shirt of all, particularly in winter, is that
which wily monks and hermits pretended to wear for a penance, well
knowing that they could have no garment cooler, more comfortable, or
more healthy. I mean, of course, the rough hair-shirt. Like flannel, it
is a non-conductor of heat; but then, too, it acts the part of a
shampooer, and with its perpetual friction soothes the surface of the
skin, and prevents the circulation from being arrested at any one point
of the body. Though I doubt if any of my readers will take a hint from
the wisdom of the merry anchorites, they will perhaps allow me to
suggest that the next best thing to wear next the skin is flannel, and
that too of the coarsest description.

“Quantity is better than quality in linen. Nevertheless it should be
fine and well spun. The loose cuff, which we borrowed from the French
some four years ago, is a great improvement on the old tight wrist-band,
and, indeed, it must be borne in mind that anything which binds any
part of the body tightly impedes the circulation, and is therefore
unhealthy as well as ungraceful.

“The necessity for a large stock of linen depends on a rule far better
than Brummell’s, of three shirts a day, viz:--

“Change your linen whenever it is at all dirty.

“This is the best guide with regard to collars, socks,
pocket-handkerchiefs, and our under garments. No rule can be laid down
for the number we should wear per week, for everything depends on
circumstances. Thus in the country all our linen remains longer clean
than in town; in dirty, wet, or dusty weather, our socks get soon dirty
and must be changed; or, if we have a cold, to say nothing of the
possible but not probable case of tear-shedding on the departure of
friends, we shall want more than one pocket-handkerchief per diem. In
fact, the last article of modern civilization is put to so many uses, is
so much displayed, and liable to be called into action on so many
various engagements, that we should always have a clean one in our
pockets. Who knows when it may not serve us is in good stead? Who can
tell how often the corner of the delicate cambric will have to represent
a tear which, like difficult passages in novels is ‘left to the
imagination.’ Can a man of any feeling call on a disconsolate widow, for
instance, and listen to her woes, without at least pulling out that
expressive appendage? Can any one believe in our sympathy if the article
in question is a dirty one? There are some people who, like the clouds,
only exist to weep; and King Solomon, though not one of them, has given
them great encouragement in speaking of the house of mourning. We are
bound to weep with them, and we are bound to weep elegantly.

“A man whose dress is neat, clean, simple, and appropriate, will pass
muster anywhere.

“A well-dressed man does not require so much an extensive as a varied
wardrobe. He wants a different costume for every season and every
occasion; but if what he selects is simple rather than striking, he may
appear in the same clothes as often as he likes, as long as they are
fresh and appropriate to the season and the object. There are four kinds
of coats which he must have: a morning-coat, a frock-coat, a dress-coat,
and an over-coat. An economical man may do well with four of the first,
and one of each of the others per annum. The dress of a gentleman in the
present day should not cost him more than the tenth part of his income
on an average. But as fortunes vary more than position, if his income is
large it will take a much smaller proportion, if small a larger one. If
a man, however, mixes in society, and I write for those who do so, there
are some things which are indispensable to even the proper dressing, and
every occasion will have its proper attire.

“In his own house then, and in the morning, there is no reason why he
should not wear out his old clothes. Some men take to the delightful
ease of a dressing-gown and slippers; and if bachelors, they do well. If
family men, it will probably depend on whether the lady or the gentleman
wears the pantaloons. The best walking-dress for a non-professional man
is a suit of tweed of the same color, ordinary boots, gloves not too
dark for the coat, a scarf with a pin in winter, or a small tie of one
color in summer, a respectable black hat and a cane. The last item is
perhaps the most important, and though its use varies with fashion, I
confess I am sorry when I see it go out. The best substitute for a
walking-stick is an umbrella, _not_ a parasol unless it be given you by
a lady to carry. The main point of the walking-dress is the harmony of
colors, but this should not be carried to the extent of M. de Maltzan,
who some years ago made a bet to wear nothing but pink at Baden-Baden
for a whole year, and had boots and gloves of the same lively hue. He
won his wager, but also the soubriquet of ‘Le Diable enflammé.’ The
walking-dress should vary according to the place and hour. In the
country or at the sea-side a straw hat or wide-awake may take the place
of the beaver, and the nuisance of gloves be even dispensed with in the
former. But in the city where a man is supposed to make visits as well
as lounge in the street, the frock coat of very dark blue or black, or a
black cloth cut-away, the white waistcoat, and lavender gloves, are
almost indispensable. Very thin boots should be avoided at all times,
and whatever clothes one wears they should be well brushed. The shirt,
whether seen or not, should be quite plain. The shirt collar should
never have a color on it, but it may be stiff or turned down according
as the wearer is Byronically or Brummellically disposed. The scarf, if
simple and of modest colors, is perhaps the best thing we can wear round
the neck; but if a neck-tie is preferred it should not be too long, nor
tied in too stiff and studied a manner. The cane should be extremely
simple, a mere stick in fact, with no gold head, and yet for the town
not rough, thick, or clumsy. The frock-coat should be ample and loose,
and a tall well-built man may throw it back. At any rate, it should
never be buttoned up. Great-coats should be buttoned up, of a dark
color, not quite black, longer than the frock-coat, but never long
enough to reach the ankles. If you have visits to make you should do
away with the great-coat, if the weather allows you to do so. The
frock-coat, or black cut-away, with a white waistcoat in summer, is the
best dress for making calls in.

“It is simple nonsense to talk of modern civilization, and rejoice that
the cruelties of the dark ages can never be perpetrated in these days
and this country. I maintain that they are perpetrated freely,
generally, daily, with the consent of the wretched victim himself, in
the compulsion to wear evening clothes. Is there anything at once more
comfortless or more hideous? Let us begin with what the delicate call
limb-covers, which we are told were the invention of the Gauls, but I am
inclined to think, of a much worse race, for it is clearly an
anachronism to ascribe the discovery to a Venetian called Piantaleone,
and it can only have been Inquisitors or demons who inflicted this
scourge on the race of man, and his ninth-parts, the tailors, for I take
it that both are equally bothered by the tight pantaloon. Let us pause
awhile over this unsightly garment, and console ourselves with the
reflection that as every country, and almost every year, has a different
fashion in its make of it, we may at last be emancipated from it
altogether, or at least be able to wear it _à la Turque_.

“But it is not all trousers that I rebel against. If I might wear linen
appendices in summer, and fur continuations in winter, I would not
groan, but it is the evening-dress that inflicts on the man who likes
society the necessity of wearing the same trying cloth all the year
round, so that under Boreas he catches colds, and under the dog-star he
melts. This unmentionable, but most necessary disguise of the ‘human
form divine,’ is one that never varies in this country, and therefore I
must lay down the rule:--

“For all evening wear--black cloth trousers.

“But the tortures of evening dress do not end with our lower limbs. Of
all the iniquities perpetrated under the Reign of Terror, none has
lasted so long as that of the strait-jacket, which was palmed off on the
people as a ‘habit de compagnie.’ If it were necessary to sing a hymn of
praise to Robespierre, Marat, and Co., I would rather take the
guillotine as my subject to extol than the swallow tail. And yet we
endure the stiffness, unsightliness, uncomfortableness, and want of
grace of the latter, with more resignation than that with which
Charlotte Corday put her beautiful neck into the ‘trou d’enfer’ of the
former. Fortunately modern republicanism has triumphed over ancient
etiquette, and the tail-coat of to-day is looser and more easy than it
was twenty years ago. I can only say, let us never strive to make it
bearable, till we have abolished it. Let us abjure such vulgarities as
silk collars, white silk linings, and so forth, which attempt to
beautify this monstrosity, as a hangman might wreathe his gallows with
roses. The plainer the manner in which you wear your misery, the
better.

“Then, again, the black waistcoat, stiff, tight, and comfortless. Fancy
Falstaff in a ball-dress such as we now wear. No amount of embroidery,
gold-trimmings, or jewel-buttons will render such an infliction grateful
to the mass. The best plan is to wear thorough mourning for your
wretchedness. In France and America, the cooler white waistcoat is
admitted. However, as we have it, let us make the best of it, and not
parade our misery by hideous ornamentation. The only evening waistcoat
for all purposes for a man of taste is one of simple black, with the
simplest possible buttons.

“These three items never vary for dinner-party, muffin-worry, or ball.
The only distinction allowed is in the neck-tie. For dinner, the opera,
and balls, this must be white, and the smaller the better. It should be
too, of a washable texture, not silk, nor netted, nor hanging down, nor
of any foppish production, but a simple, white tie, without embroidery.
The black tie is admitted for evening parties, and should be equally
simple. The shirt-front, which figures under the tie should be plain,
with unpretending small plaits. The glove must be white, not yellow.
Recently, indeed, a fashion has sprung up of wearing lavender gloves in
the evening. They are economical, and as all economy is an abomination,
must be avoided. Gloves should always be worn at a ball. At a
dinner-party in town they should be worn on entering the room, and drawn
off for dinner. While, on the one hand, we must avoid the awkwardness of
a gallant sea-captain who, wearing no gloves at a dance, excused himself
to his partner by saying, ‘Never mind, miss, I can wash my hands when
I’ve done dancing,’ we have no need, in the present day, to copy the
Roman gentleman mentioned by Athenæus, who wore gloves at dinner that he
might pick his meat from the hot dishes more rapidly than the
bare-handed guests. As to gloves at tea-parties and so forth, we are
generally safer with than without them. If it is quite a small party, we
may leave them in our pocket, and in the country they are scarcely
expected to be worn; but ‘touch not a cat but with a glove;’ you are
always safer with them.

“I must not quit this subject without assuring myself that my reader
knows more about it now than he did before. In fact I have taken one
thing for granted, viz., that he knows what it is to be dressed, and
what undressed. Of course I do not suppose him to be in the blissful
state of ignorance on the subject once enjoyed by our first parents. I
use the words ‘dressed’ and ‘undressed’ rather in the sense meant by a
military tailor, or a cook with reference to a salad. You need not be
shocked. I am one of those people who wear spectacles for fear of seeing
anything with the naked eye. I am the soul of scrupulosity. But I am
wondering whether everybody arranges his wardrobe as our ungrammatical
nurses used to do ours, under the heads of ‘best, second-best,
third-best,’ and so on, and knows what things ought to be placed under
each. To be ‘undressed’ is to be dressed for work and ordinary
occupations, to wear a coat which you do not fear to spoil, and a
neck-tie which your ink-stand will not object to, but your acquaintance
might. To be ‘dressed,’ on the other hand, since by dress we show our
respect for society at large, or the persons with whom we are to
mingle, is to be clothed in the garments which the said society
pronounces as suitable to particular occasions; so that evening dress in
the morning, morning dress in the evening, and top boots and a red coat
for walking, may all be called ‘undress,’ if not positively ‘bad dress.’
But there are shades of being ‘dressed;’ and a man is called ‘little
dressed,’ ‘well dressed,’ and ‘much dressed,’ not according to the
quantity but the quality of his coverings.

“To be ‘little dressed,’ is to wear old things, of a make that is no
longer the fashion, having no pretension to elegance, artistic beauty,
or ornament. It is also to wear lounging clothes on occasions which
demand some amount of precision. To be ‘much dressed’ is to be in the
extreme of the fashion, with bran new clothes, jewelry, and ornaments,
with a touch of extravagance and gaiety in your colors. Thus to wear
patent leather boots and yellow gloves in a quiet morning stroll is to
be much dressed, and certainly does not differ immensely from being
badly dressed. To be ‘well dressed’ is the happy medium between these
two, which is not given to every one to hold, inasmuch as good taste is
rare, and is a _sine quâ non_ thereof. Thus while you avoid ornament and
all fastness, you must cultivate fashion, that is _good_ fashion, in the
make of your clothes. A man must not be made by his tailor, but should
make him, educate him, give him his own good taste. To be well dressed
is to be dressed precisely as the occasion, place, weather, your height,
figure, position, age, and, remember it, your _means_ require. It is to
be clothed without peculiarity, pretension, or eccentricity; without
violent colors, elaborate ornament, or senseless fashions, introduced,
often, by tailors for their own profit. Good dressing is to wear as
little jewelry as possible, to be scrupulously neat, clean, and fresh,
and to carry your clothes as if you did not give them a thought.

“Then, too, there is a scale of honor among clothes, which must not be
forgotten. Thus, a new coat is more honorable than an old one, a
cut-away or shooting-coat than a dressing-gown, a frock-coat than a
cut-away, a dark blue frock-coat than a black frock-coat, a tail-coat
than a frock-coat. There is no honor at all in a blue tail-coat,
however, except on a gentleman of eighty, accompanied with brass buttons
and a buff waistcoat. There is more honor in an old hunting-coat than in
a new one, in a uniform with a bullet hole in it than one without, in a
fustian jacket and smock-frock than in a frock-coat, because they are
types of labor, which is far more honorable than lounging. Again, light
clothes are generally placed above dark ones, because they cannot be so
long worn, and are, therefore, proofs of expenditure, _alias_ money,
which in this world is a commodity more honored than every other; but,
on the other hand, tasteful dress is always more honorable than that
which has only cost much. Light gloves are more esteemed than dark ones,
and the prince of glove-colors is, undeniably, lavender.

“‘I should say Jones was a fast man,’ said a friend to me one day, ‘for
he wears a white hat.’ If this idea of my companion’s be right, fastness
may be said to consist mainly in peculiarity. There is certainly only
one step from the sublimity of fastness to the ridiculousness of
snobbery, and it is not always easy to say where the one ends and the
other begins. A dandy, on the other hand, is the clothes on a man, not a
man in clothes, a living lay figure who displays much dress, and is
quite satisfied if you praise it without taking heed of him. A bear is
in the opposite extreme; never dressed enough, and always very roughly;
but he is almost as bad as the other, for he sacrifices everything to
his ease and comfort. The off-hand style of dress only suits an off-hand
character. It was, at one time, the fashion to affect a certain
negligence, which was called poetic, and supposed to be the result of
genius. An ill-tied, if not positively untied cravat was a sure sign of
an unbridled imagination; and a waistcoat was held together by one
button only, as if the swelling soul in the wearer’s bosom had burst all
the rest. If, in addition to this, the hair was unbrushed and curly, you
were certain of passing for a ‘man of soul.’ I should not recommend any
young gentleman to adopt this style, unless, indeed, he can mouth a
great deal, and has a good stock of quotations from the poets. It is of
no use to show me the clouds, unless I can positively see you in them,
and no amount of negligence in your dress and person will convince me
you are a genius, unless you produce an octavo volume of poems published
by yourself. I confess I am glad that the _négligé_ style, so common in
novels of ten years back, has been succeeded by neatness. What we want
is real ease in the clothes, and, for my part, I should rejoice to see
the Knickerbocker style generally adopted.

“Besides the ordinary occasions treated of before, there are several
special occasions requiring a change of dress. Most of our sports,
together with marriage (which some people include in sports), come under
this head. Now, the less change we make the better in the present day,
particularly in the sports, where, if we are dressed with scrupulous
accuracy, we are liable to be subjected to a comparison between our
clothes and our skill. A man who wears a red coat to hunt in, should be
able to hunt, and not sneak through gates or dodge over gaps. A few
remarks on dresses worn in different sports may be useful. Having laid
down the rule that a strict accuracy of sporting costume is no longer in
good taste, we can dismiss shooting and fishing at once, with the
warning that we must not dress _well_ for either. An old coat with large
pockets, gaiters in one case, and, if necessary, large boots in the
other, thick shoes at any rate, a wide-awake, and a well-filled bag or
basket at the end of the day, make up a most respectable sportsman of
the lesser kind. Then for cricket you want nothing more unusual than
flannel trousers, which should be quite plain, unless your club has
adopted some colored stripe thereon, a colored flannel shirt of no very
violent hue, the same colored cap, shoes with spikes in them, and a
great coat.

“For hunting, lastly, you have to make more change, if only to insure
your own comfort and safety. Thus cord-breeches and some kind of boots
are indispensable. So are spurs, so a hunting-whip or crop; so too, if
you do not wear a hat, is the strong round cap that is to save your
valuable skull from cracking if you are thrown on your head. Again, I
should pity the man who would attempt to hunt in a frock-coat or a
dress-coat; and a scarf with a pin in it is much more convenient than a
tie. But beyond these you need nothing out of the common way, but a
pocketful of money. The red coat, for instance, is only worn by regular
members of a hunt, and boys who ride over the hounds and like to display
their ‘pinks.’ In any case you are better with an ordinary riding-coat
of dark color, though undoubtedly the red is prettier in the field. If
you _will_ wear the latter, see that it is cut square, for the
swallow-tail is obsolete, and worn only by the fine old boys who
‘hunted, sir, fifty years ago, sir, when I was a boy of fifteen, sir.
Those _were_ hunting days, sir; such runs and such leaps.’ Again, your
‘cords’ should be light in color and fine in quality; your waistcoat, if
with a red coat, quite light too; your scarf of cashmere, of a buff
color, and fastened with a small simple gold pin; your hat should be
old, and your cap of dark green or black velvet, plated inside, and with
a small stiff peak, should be made to look old. Lastly, for a choice of
boots. The Hessians are more easily cleaned, and therefore less
expensive to keep; the ‘tops’ are more natty. Brummell, who cared more
for the hunting-dress than the hunting itself, introduced the fashion of
pipe-claying the tops of the latter, but the old original ‘mahoganies,’
of which the upper leathers are simply polished, seem to be coming into
fashion again.”




CHAPTER VIII.

MANLY EXERCISES.


Bodily exercise is one of the most important means provided by nature
for the maintenance of health, and in order to prove the advantages of
exercise, we must show what is to be exercised, why exercise is
necessary, and the various modes in which it may be taken.

The human body may be regarded as a wonderful machine, the various parts
of which are so wonderfully adapted to each other, that if one be
disturbed all must suffer. The bones and muscles are the parts of the
human frame on which motion depends. There are four hundred muscles in
the body; each one has certain functions to perform, which cannot be
disturbed without danger to the whole. They assist the tendons in
keeping the bones in their places, and put them in motion. Whether we
walk or run, sit or stoop, bend the arm or head, or chew our food, we
may be said to open and shut a number of hinges, or ball and socket
joints. And it is a wise provision of nature, that, to a certain extent,
the more the muscles are exercised, the stronger do they become; hence
it is that laborers and artisans are stronger and more muscular than
those persons whose lives are passed in easy occupations or
professional duties.

Besides strengthening the limbs, muscular exercise has a most beneficial
influence on respiration and the circulation of the blood. The larger
blood-vessels are generally placed deep among the muscles, consequently
when the latter are put into motion, the blood is driven through the
arteries and veins with much greater rapidity than when there is no
exercise; it is more completely purified, as the action of the
insensible perspiration is promoted, which relieves the blood of many
irritating matters, chiefly carbonic acid and certain salts, taken up in
its passage through the system, and a feeling of lightness and
cheerfulness is diffused over body and mind.

We have said that a good state of health depends in a great measure on
the proper exercise of _all the muscles_. But on looking at the greater
portion of our industrial population,--artisans and workers in factories
generally--we find them, in numerous instances, standing or sitting in
forced or unnatural positions, using only a few of their muscles, while
the others remain, comparatively speaking, unused or inactive. Sawyers,
filers, tailors, and many others may be easily recognized as they walk
the streets, by the awkward movement and bearing impressed upon them by
long habit. The stooping position especially tells most fatally upon the
health; weavers, shoemakers, and cotton-spinners have generally a sallow
and sickly appearance, very different from that of those whose
occupation does not require them to stoop, or to remain long in a
hurtful posture. Their common affections are indigestion and dull
headache, with giddiness especially during summer. They attribute their
complaints to two causes, one of which is the posture of the body, bent
for twelve or thirteen hours a day, the other the heat of the
working-room.

Besides the trades above enumerated, there are many others productive of
similar evils by the position into which they compel workmen, or by the
close and confined places in which they are carried on; and others,
again, in their very natures injurious. Plumbers and painters suffer
from the noxious materials which they are constantly using, grinders and
filers from dust, and bakers from extremes of temperature and irregular
hours. Wherever there is physical depression, there is a disposition to
resort to injurious stimulants; and “the time of relief from work is
generally spent, not in invigorating the animal frame, but in
aggravating complaints, and converting functional into organic disease.”

But there are others who suffer from artificial poisons and defective
exercise as well as artisans and operatives--the numerous class of
shopkeepers; the author above quoted says, “Week after week passes
without affording them one pure inspiration. Often, also, they have not
exercise even in the open air of the town; a furlong’s walk to church on
Sunday being the extent of their rambles. When they have the opportunity
they want the inclination for exercise. The father is anxious about his
trade or his family, the mother is solicitous about her children. Each
has little taste for recreation or amusement.” The various disorders,
generally known under the name of indigestion, disorders dependant on a
want of circulation of blood through the bowels, biliary derangements,
and headache, are well known to be the general attendants on trade,
closely pursued. Indeed, in almost every individual, this absorbing
principle produces one or other of the various maladies to which I have
alluded.

The great remedy for the evils here pointed out is bodily exercise, of
some kind, every day, and as much as possible in the open air. An
opinion prevails that an occasional walk is sufficient to maintain the
balance of health; but if the intervals of inaction be too long, the
good effect of one walk is lost before another is taken. Regularity and
sufficiency are to be as much regarded in exercise as in eating or
sleeping. Sir James Clark says, that “the exercise which is to benefit
the system generally, must be in the open air, and extend to the whole
muscular system. Without regular exercise out of doors, no young person
can continue long healthy; and it is the duty of parents in fixing their
children at boarding schools to ascertain that sufficient time is
occupied daily in this way. They may be assured that attention to this
circumstance is quite as essential to the moral and physical health of
their children, as any branch of education which they may be taught.”

Exercise, however, must be regulated by certain rules, the principal of
which is, to avoid carrying it to excess--to proportion it always to the
state of health and habit of the individual. Persons of short breath
predisposed to determination of blood to the head, subject to
palpitation of the heart, or general weakness, are not to believe that a
course of severe exercise will do them good; on the contrary, many
serious results often follow over-fatigue. For the same reason it is
desirable to avoid active exertion immediately after a full meal, as the
foundation of heart diseases is sometimes laid by leaping or running
after eating. The great object should be so to blend exercise and
repose, as to ensure the highest possible amount of bodily vigor. It
must be recollected that exhausted muscles can be restored only by the
most perfect rest.

In the next place, it is a mistake to consider the labor of the day as
equivalent to exercise. Work, generally speaking, is a mere routine
process, carried on with but little variety of circumstances, in a
confined atmosphere, and in a temperature frequently more exhaustive
than restorative. The workman requires something more than this to keep
him in health; he must have exercise as often as possible in the open
air,--in fields, parks, or pleasure grounds; but if these are not at his
command, the streets of the town are always open to him, and a walk in
these is better than no walk at all. The mere change of scene is
beneficial, and in walking he generally sets in motion a different set
of muscles from those he has used while at work.

To derive the greatest amount of good from exercise, it must be combined
with amusement, and be made pleasureable and recreative. This important
fact ought never to be lost sight of, since to ignorance of it alone we
owe many of the evils which afflict society. And it would be well if
those who have been accustomed to look on social amusements as
destructive of the morals of the people, would consider how much good
may be done by giving the mind a direction which, while promotive of
health, would fill it with cheerfulness and wean it from debasing
habits. The character of our sports at the present time, partake but
little of the robust and boisterous spirit of our forefathers; but with
the refinement of amusements, the opportunity for enjoying them has been
grievously diminished. Cheering signs of a better state of things are,
however, visible in many quarters, and we trust that the good work will
be carried on until the whole of our population shall be in possession
of the means and leisure for pleasurable recreation.

While indulging in the recreative sports which are to restore and
invigorate us, we must be mindful of the many points of etiquette and
kindness which will do much, if properly attended to, to promote the
enjoyment of our exercise, and we propose to review the principal
exercises used among us, and to point out in what places the delicate
and gentlemanly attention to our companions will do the most to
establish, for the person who practices them, the reputation of a
polished gentleman.


RIDING.

There are no amusements, probably, which give us so wide a scope for the
rendering of attention to a friend as riding and driving. Accompanied,
as we may be at any time, by timid companions, the power to convince
them, by the management of the horse we ride, and the watch kept at the
same time on theirs, that we are competent to act the part of companion
and guardian, will enable us to impart to them a great degree of
reliance on us, and will, by lessening their fear do much to enhance
the enjoyment of the excursion.

With ladies, in particular, a horseman cannot be too careful to display
a regard for the fears of their companions, and by a constant watch on
all the horses in the cavalcade, to show at once his ability and
willingness to assist his companions.

There are few persons, comparatively speaking, even among those who ride
often, who can properly assist a lady in mounting her horse. An
over-anxiety to help a lady as gracefully as possible, generally results
in a nervous trembling effort which is exceedingly disagreeable to the
lady, and, at the same time, dangerous; for were the horse to shy or
start, he could not be so easily quieted by a nervous man as by one who
was perfectly cool. In the mount the lady must gather her skirt into her
left hand, and stand close to the horse, her face toward his head, and
her right hand resting on the pommel. The gentleman, having asked
permission to assist her, stands at the horse’s shoulder, facing the
lady, and stooping low, he places his right hand at a proper elevation
from the ground. The lady then places her left foot on the gentleman’s
palm, and as he raises his hand she springs slightly on her right foot,
and thus reaches the saddle. The gentleman must not jerk his hand
upward, but lift it with a gentle motion. This method of mounting is
preferable to a step or horse-block. Keep a _firm_ hand, for a sinking
foot-hold will diminish the confidence of a lady in her escort, and, in
many cases cause her unnecessary alarm while mounting. To any one who is
likely to be called on to act as cavalier to ladies in horse-back
excursions, we would recommend the following practice: Saddle a horse
with a side saddle, and ask a gentleman friend to put on the skirt of a
lady’s habit, and with him, practice the mounting and dismounting until
you have thoroughly conquered any difficulties you may have experienced
at first.

After the seat is first taken by the lady, the gentleman should always
stand at the side of the lady’s horse until she is firmly fixed in the
saddle, has a good foot-hold on the stirrup, and has the reins and whip
well in hand. Having ascertained that his companion is firmly and
comfortably fixed in the saddle, the gentleman should mount his horse
and take his riding position on the right or “off” side of the lady’s
horse, so that, in case of the horse’s shying in such a way as to bring
him against the other horse, the lady will suffer no inconvenience. In
riding with two ladies there are two rules in regard to the gentleman’s
position.

If both ladies are good riders, they should ride side by side, the
ladies to the left; but, if the contrary should be the case, the
gentleman should ride _between_ the ladies in order to be ready in a
moment to assist either in case of one of the horses becoming difficult
to manage. Before allowing a lady to mount, the entire furniture of her
horse should be carefully examined by her escort. The saddle and girths
should be tested to see if they are firm, the stirrup leather examined,
in case of the tongue of the buckle being in danger of slipping out by
not being well buckled at first, and most particularly the bridle, curb,
headstall, and reins should be carefully and thoroughly examined, for on
them depends the entire control of the horse. These examinations should
_never_ be left to the stablehelps, as the continual harnessing of
horses by them often leads to a loose and careless way of attending to
such matters, which, though seemingly trivial, may lead to serious
consequences.

On the road, the constant care of the gentleman should be to render the
ride agreeable to his companion, by the pointing out of objects of
interest with which she may not be acquainted, the reference to any
peculiar beauty of landscape which may have escaped her notice, and a
general lively tone of conversation, which will, if she be timid, draw
her mind from the fancied dangers of horseback riding, and render her
excursion much more agreeable than if she be left to imagine horrors
whenever her horse may prick up his ears or whisk his tail. And, while
thus conversing, keep an eye always on the lady’s horse, so that in case
he should really get frightened, you may be ready by your instruction
and assistance to aid the lady in quieting his fears.

In dismounting you should offer your right hand to the lady’s left, and
allow her to use _your_ left as a step to dismount on, gently declining
it as soon as the lady has left her seat on the saddle, and just before
she springs. Many ladies spring from the saddle, but this generally
confuses the gentleman and is dangerous to the lady, for the horse _may_
move at the instant she springs, which would inevitably throw her
backward and might result in a serious injury.


DRIVING.

In the indulgence of this beautiful pastime there are many points of
care and attention to be observed; they will render to the driver
himself much gratification by the confidence they will inspire in his
companion, by having the knowledge that he or she is being driven by a
careful horseman, and thus knowing that half of what danger may attend
the pleasure, is removed.

On reaching the door of your companion’s residence, whom we will suppose
to be in this case a lady,--though the same attention may well be
extended to a gentleman,--drive close to the mounting-block or curb, and
by heading your horse toward the middle of the road, and slightly
backing the wagon, separate the fore and hind wheels on the side next
the block as much as possible. This gives room for the lady to ascend
into the wagon without soiling her dress by rubbing against either tire,
and also gives the driver room to lean over and tuck into the wagon any
part of a lady’s dress that may hang out after she is seated.

In assisting the lady to ascend into the wagon, the best and safest way
is to tie the horse firmly to a hitching-post or tree, and then to give
to your companion the aid of both your hands; but, in case of there
being no post to which you can make the rein fast, the following rule
may be adopted:

Grasp the reins firmly with one hand, and draw them just tight enough to
let the horse feel that they are held, and with the other hand assist
the lady; under _no_ circumstances, even with the most quiet horse,
should you place a lady in your vehicle without _any_ hold on the horse,
for, although many horses would stand perfectly quiet, the whole race of
them are timid, and any sudden noise or motion may start them, in which
case the life of your companion may be endangered. In the light _no-top_
or _York_ wagon, which is now used almost entirely for pleasure drives,
the right hand cushion should always be higher by three or four inches
than the left, for it raises the person driving, thus giving him more
control, and renders the lady’s seat more comfortable and more safe. It
is a mistaken idea, in driving, that it shows a perfect horseman, to
drive fast. On the contrary, a _good_ horseman is more careful of his
horse than a poor one, and in starting, the horse is always allowed to
go slowly for time; as he gradually takes up a quicker pace, and becomes
warmed up; the driver may push him even to the top of his speed for some
distance, always, however, allowing him to slacken his pace toward the
end of his drive, and to come to the stopping-place at a moderate gait.

Endeavor, by your conversation on the road, to make the ride agreeable
to your companion. Never try to _show off_ your driving, but remember,
that there is no one who drives with so much apparent ease and so little
display as the professional jockey, who, as he devotes his life to the
management of the reins, may well be supposed to be the most thoroughly
good “whip.”

In helping the lady out of the wagon, the same rule must be observed as
in the start; namely, to have your horse well in hand or firmly tied.
Should your companion be a gentleman and a horseman, the courtesy is
always to offer him the reins, though the offer, if made to yourself by
another with whom you are riding, should always be declined; unless,
indeed, the horse should be particularly “hard-mouthed” and your
friend’s arms should be tired, in which case you should relieve him.

Be especially careful in the use of the whip, that it may not spring
back outside of the vehicle and strike your companion. This rule should
be particularly attended to in driving “tandem” or “four-in-hand,” as a
cut with a heavy tandem-whip is by no means a pleasant accompaniment to
your drive.


BOXING.

In this much-abused accomplishment, there would, from the rough nature
of the sport, seem to be small room for civility; yet, in none of the
many manly sports is there so great a scope for the exercise of
politeness as in this. Should your adversary be your inferior in boxing,
there are many ways to teach him and encourage him in his pursuit of
proficiency, without knocking him about as if your desire was to injure
him as much as possible. And you will find that his gratitude for your
forbearance will prompt him to exercise the same indulgence to others
who are inferior to himself, and thus by the exchange of gentlemanly
civility the science of boxing is divested of one of its most
objectionable points, viz: the danger of the combatants becoming angry
and changing the sport to a brutal fight.

Always allow your antagonist to choose his gloves from the set, though,
if you recommend _any_ to him, let him take the hardest ones and you the
softest; thus he will receive the easier blows. Allow him the choice of
ground and position, and endeavor in every way to give him the utmost
chance. In this way, even if you should be worsted in the game, your
kindness and courtesy to him will be acknowledged by any one who may be
with you, and by no one more readily than your antagonist himself. These
same rules apply to the art of fencing, the most graceful and beautiful
of exercises. Let your opponent have his choice of the foils and
sword-gloves, give him the best position for light, and in your thrusts
remember that to make a “hit” does not require you to force your foil as
violently as you can against your antagonist’s breast; but, that every
touch will show if your foils be chalked and the one who has the most
“spots” at the end of the encounter is the beaten man.


SAILING.

Within a few years there has been a most decided movement in favor of
aquatic pursuits. Scarcely a town can be found, near the sea or on the
bank of a river but what can either furnish a yacht or a barge. In all
our principal cities the “navies” of yachts and barges number many
boats. The barge clubs particularly are well-fitted with active, healthy
men, who can appreciate the physical benefit of a few hours’ work at the
end of a sixteen-foot sweep, and who prefer health and blistered hands
to a life of fashionable and unhealthy amusement. Under the head of
sailing we will give some hints of etiquette as to sailing and rowing
together. A gentleman will never parade his superiority in these
accomplishments, still less boast of it, but rather, that the others may
not feel their inferiority, he will keep considerably within his powers.
If a guest or a stranger be of the party, the best place must be offered
to him, though he may be a bad oar; but, at the same time, if a guest
knows his inferiority in this respect, he will, for more reasons than
one, prefer an inferior position. So, too, when a certain amount of
exertion is required, as in boating, a well-bred man will offer to take
the greater share, pull the heaviest oar, and will never shirk his work.
In short, the whole rule of good manners on such occasions is not to be
selfish, and the most amiable man will therefore be the best bred. It is
certainly desirable that a gentleman should be able to handle an oar, or
to steer and work a yacht, both that when he has an opportunity he may
acquire health, and that he may be able to take part in the charming
excursions which are made by water. One rule should apply to all these
aquatic excursions, and that is, that the gentleman who invites the
ladies, should there be any, and who is, therefore, at the trouble of
getting up the party, should always be allowed to steer the boat, unless
he decline the post, for he has the advantage of more intimate
acquaintance with the ladies, whom he will have to entertain on the
trip, and the post of honor should be given him as a compliment to his
kindness in undertaking the preliminaries.


HUNTING.

Gentlemen residing in the country, and keeping a stable, are generally
ready to join the hunt club. We are gradually falling into the English
sports and pastimes. Cricket, boxing, and hunting, are being more and
more practiced every year, and our horsemen and pugilists aspire to
conquer those of Britain, when a few years back, to attempt such a thing
would have been considered folly. In this country the organization of
hunt-clubs is made as much to rid the country of the foxes as to enjoy
the sport. We differ much from the Britons in our hunting; we have often
a hilly dangerous country, with high worm and post-and-rail fences
crossing it, deep streams with precipitous sides and stony ground to
ride over. We hunt in cold weather when the ground is frozen hard, and
we take everything as it is, hills, fences, streams, and hedges, risking
our necks innumerable times in a hunt. In England the hunters have a
flat country, fences which do not compare to ours in height, and they
hunt _after_ a frost when the ground is soft.

Our hunting field at the “meet” does not show the gaudy equipment and
top-boots of England, but the plain dress of the gentleman farmer,
sometimes a blue coat and jockey-cap, but oftener the every-day coat and
felt hat, but the etiquette of our hunting field is more observed than
in England. There any one joins the meet, if it is a large one, but here
no one enters the field unless acquainted with one or more of the
gentlemen on the ground. The rules in the hunt are few and simple. Never
attempt to hunt unless you have a fine seat in the saddle and a good
horse, and never accept the loan of a friend’s horse, still less an
enemy’s, unless you ride very well. A man may forgive you for breaking
his daughter’s heart but never for breaking his hunter’s neck. Another
point is, always to be quiet at a meet, and never join one unless
acquainted with some one in the field. Pluck, skill, and a good horse
are essentials in hunting. Never talk of your achievements, avoid
enthusiastic shouting when you break cover, and do not ride over the
hounds. Keep a firm hand, a quick eye, an easy, calm frame of mind, and
a good, firm seat on the saddle. Watch the country you are going over,
be always ready to help a friend who may “come to grief,” and with the
rules and the quiet demeanor you will soon be a favorite in the field.


SKATING.

Though we may, in the cold winter, sigh for the return of spring
breezes, and look back with regret on the autumn sports, or even the
heat of summer, there is yet a balm for our frozen spirits in the
glorious and exhilarating sports of winter. The sleigh filled with
laughing female beauties and “beauties,” too, of the sterner sex, and
the merry jingle of the bells as we fly along the road or through the
streets, are delights of which Old Winter alone is the giver. But,
pleasant as the sleigh-ride is, the man who looks for health and
exercise at all seasons, turns from the seductive pleasures of the
sleigh to the more simple enjoyment derived from the skates. Flying
along over the glistening ice to the accompaniment of shouts of merry
laughter at some novice’s mishap, and feeling that we have within us the
speed of the race-horse, the icy pleasure is, indeed, a good substitute
for the pleasures of the other seasons.

So universal has skating become, that instruction in this graceful
accomplishment seems almost unnecessary; but, for the benefit of the
rising generation who may peruse our work, we will give, from a
well-known authority, a few hints as to the manner of using the skates
before we add our own instruction as to the etiquette of the skating
ground.

“Before going on the ice, the young skater must learn to put on the
skates, and may also learn to walk with them easily in a room,
balancing, alternately, on each foot. A skater’s dress should be as
loose and unincumbered as possible. All fullness of dress is exposed to
the wind. As the exercise of skating produces perspiration, flannel next
the chest, shoulders, and loins, is necessary to avoid the evils of
sudden chills in cold weather.

“Either very rough or very smooth ice should be avoided. The person who,
for the first time, attempts to skate, must not trust to a stick. He may
take a friend’s hand for support, if he requires one; but that should be
soon relinquished, in order to balance himself. He will, probably,
scramble about for half an hour or so, till he begins to find out where
the edge of his skate is. The beginner must be fearless, but not
violent; nor even in a hurry. He should not let his feet get apart, and
keep his heels still nearer together. He must keep the ankle of the foot
on the ice quite firm; not attempting to gain the edge of the skate by
bending it, because the right mode of getting to either edge is by the
inclination of the whole body in the direction required; and this
inclination should be made fearlessly and decisively. The leg which is
on the ice should be kept perfectly straight; for, though the knee must
be somewhat bent at the time of striking, it must be straightened as
quickly as possible without any jerk. The leg which is off the ice
should also be kept straight, though not stiff, having an easy but
straight play, the toe pointing downwards, and the heel from six to
twelve inches of the other.

“The learner must not look down at the ice, nor at his feet, to see how
they perform. He may, at first, incline his body a little forward, for
safety, but hold his head up, and see where he goes, his person erect
and his face rather elevated than otherwise.

“When once off, he must bring both feet up together, and strike again,
as soon as he finds himself steady enough, rarely allowing both feet to
be on the ice together. The position of the arms should be easy and
varied; one being always more raised than the other, this elevation
being alternate, and the change corresponding to that of the legs; that
is, the right arm being raised as the right leg is put down, and _vice
versâ_, so that the arm and leg of the same side may not be raised
together. The face must be always turned in the direction of the line
intended to be described. Hence in backward skating, the head will be
inclined much over the shoulder; in forward skating, but slightly. All
sudden and violent action must be avoided. Stopping may be caused by
slightly bending the knees, drawing the feet together, inclining the
body forward, and pressing on the heels. It may be also caused by
turning short to the right or left, the foot on the side to which we
turn being rather more advanced, and supporting part of the weight.”[A]

[A] Walker’s Manly Exercises.

When on the ice, if you should get your skates on before your companion,
always wait for him; for, nothing is more disagreeable than being left
behind on an occasion of this kind. Be ready at all times when skating
to render assistance to any one, either lady or gentleman, who may
require it. A _gentleman_ may be distinguished at all times by the
willingness with which he will give up his sport to render himself
agreeable and kind to any one in difficulty. Should you have one of the
skating-sleds so much used for taking ladies on the ice, and should your
own ladies, if you are accompanied by any, not desire to use it, the
most becoming thing you can do is to place it at the disposal of any
other gentleman who has ladies with him, and who is not provided with
such a conveyance.

Always keep to the right in meeting a person on the ice, and always
skate perfectly clear of the line in which a lady is advancing, whether
she be on skates or on foot. Attention to the other sex is no where more
appreciated than on the ice, where they are, unless good skaters,
comparatively helpless. Be always prompt to assist in the extrication of
any one who may break through the ice, but let your zeal be tempered by
discretion, and always get a rope or ladder if possible, in preference
to going near the hole; for there is great risk of your breaking through
yourself, and endangering your own life without being able to assist the
person already submerged. But should the rope or ladder not be
convenient, the best method is to lay flat on your breast on the ice,
and push yourself cautiously along until you can touch the person’s
hand, and then let him climb by it out of the hole.


SWIMMING.

So few persons are unable to swim, that it would be useless for us to
furnish any instruction in the actual art of swimming; but a few words
on the subject of assisting others while in the water may not come
amiss.

It is a desirable accomplishment to be able to swim in a suit of
clothes. This may be practiced by good swimmers, cautiously at first, in
comparatively shallow water, and afterwards in deeper places. Occasions
may frequently occur where it may be necessary to plunge into the water
to save a drowning person, where the lack of time, or the presence of
ladies, would preclude all possibility of removing the clothes. There
are few points of etiquette in swimming, except those of giving all the
assistance in our power to beginners, and to remember the fact of our
being gentlemen, though the sport may be rough when we are off _terra
firma_. We shall therefore devote this section of our exercise
department to giving a few general directions as to supporting drowning
persons, which support is, after all, the most valued attention we can
render to any one.

If possible, always go to save a life in company with one or two others.
One companion is generally sufficient, but two will do no harm, for, if
the service of the second be not required, he can easily swim back to
shore. On reaching the object of your pursuit, if he be clinging to
anything, caution him, as you approach, to hold it until you tell him to
let go, and then to let his arms fall to his side. Then let one of your
companions place his hand under the armpit of the person to be assisted,
and you doing the like, call to him to let go his support, then tread
water until you get his arms on the shoulders of your companion and
yourself, and then swim gently to shore. Should you be alone, the utmost
you can do is to let him hold his support while you tread water near him
until further assistance can be obtained. If you are alone and he has no
support, let him rest one arm across your shoulder, put one of your arms
behind his back, and the hand under his armpit, and tread water until
help arrives. Never let a man in these circumstances _grasp_ you in any
way, particularly if he be frightened, for you may both be drowned; but,
try to cool and reassure him by the intrepidity of your own movements,
and he will be safely and easily preserved.


CRICKET.

When in the cricket-field, we must allow ourselves to enter into the
full spirit of the game; but we must not allow the excitement of the
play to make us forget what is due to others and to ourselves. A gentle,
easy, and, at the same time, gentlemanly manner, may be assumed. Always
offer to your companions the use of your private bat, if they are not
similarly provided; for the bats belonging to the club often lose the
spring in the handle from constant use, and a firm bat with a good
spring will prove very acceptable. In this way you gratify the player,
and, as a reward for your kindness, he may, from being well provided,
score more for the side than he would with inferior or worn-out tools.

This game is more purely democratic than any one we know of, and the
most aristocratic of gentlemen takes second rank, for the time, to the
most humble cricketer, if the latter be the more skillful. But a good
player is not always a gentleman, and the difference in cultivation may
always be distinguished. A _gentleman_ will never deride any one for his
bad play, nor give vent to oaths, or strong epithets, if disappointed in
the playing of one of his side. If he has to ask another player for
anything, he does so in a way to establish his claim to gentility. “May
I trouble you for that ball?” or, “Will you please to hand me that bat?”
are much preferable to “Here, you! ball there!” or, “Clumsy, don’t carry
off that bat!” Again, if a gentleman makes a mistake himself, he should
always acknowledge it quietly, and never start a stormy discussion as to
the merits of his batting or fielding. In fine, preserve the same calm
demeanor in the field that you would in the parlor, however deeply you
enter into the excitement of the game.




CHAPTER IX.

TRAVELING.


In this country where ladies travel so much alone, a gentleman has many
opportunities of making this unprotected state a pleasant one. There are
many little courtesies which you may offer to a lady when traveling,
even if she is an entire stranger to you, and by an air of respectful
deference, you may place her entirely at her ease with you, even if you
are both young.

When traveling with a lady, your duties commence when you are presented
to her as an escort. If she is personally a stranger, she will probably
meet you at the wharf or car depot; but if an old acquaintance, you
should offer to call for her at her residence. Take a hack, and call,
leaving ample time for last speeches and farewell tears. If she hands
you her purse to defray her expenses, return it to her if you stop for
any length of time at a place where she may wish to make purchases. If
you make no stop upon your journey, keep the purse until you arrive at
your destination, and then return it. If she does not give you the money
for her expenses when you start, you had best pay them yourself, keeping
an account, and she will repay you at the journey’s end.

When you start, select for your companion the pleasantest seat, see that
her shawl and bag are within her reach, the window lowered or raised as
she may prefer, and then leave her to attend to the baggage, or, if you
prefer, let her remain in the hack while you get checks for the trunks.
Never keep a lady standing upon the wharf or in the depot, whilst you
arrange the baggage.

When you arrive at a station, place your lady in a hack while you get
the trunks.

When arriving at a hotel, escort your companion to the parlor, and leave
her there whilst you engage rooms. As soon as her room is ready, escort
her to the door, and leave her, as she will probably wish to change her
dress or lie down, after the fatigue of traveling. If you remain
chatting in the parlor, although she may be too polite to give any sign
of weariness, you may feel sure she is longing to go to a room where she
can bathe her face and smooth her hair.

If you remain in the hotel to any meal, ask before you leave her, at
what hour she wishes to dine, sup, or breakfast, and at that hour, knock
at her door, and escort her to the table.

If you remain in the city at which her journey terminates, you should
call the day after your arrival upon the companion of your journey. If,
previous to that journey, you have never met her, she has the privilege
of continuing the acquaintance or not as she pleases, so if all your
gallantry is repaid by a cut the next time you meet her, you must
submit, and hope for better luck next time. In such a case, you are at
liberty to decline escorting her again should the request be made.

When traveling alone, your opportunities to display your gallantry will
be still more numerous. To offer to carry a bag for a lady who is
unattended, to raise or lower a window for her, offer to check her
baggage, procure her a hack, give her your arm from car to boat or boat
to car, assist her children over the bad crossings, or in fact extend
any such kindness, will mark you as a gentleman, and win you the thanks
due to your courtesy. Be careful however not to be too attentive, as you
then become officious, and embarrass when you mean to please.

If you are going to travel in other countries, in Europe, especially, I
would advise you to study the languages, before you attempt to go
abroad. French is the tongue you will find most useful in Europe, as it
is spoken in the courts, and amongst diplomatists; but, in order fully
to enjoy a visit to any country, you must speak the language of that
country. You can then visit in the private houses, see life among the
peasantry, go with confidence from village to town, from city to city,
learning more of the country in one day from familiar intercourse with
the natives, than you would learn in a year from guide books or the
explanations of your courier. The way to really enjoy a journey through
a strange land, is not to roll over the high ways in your carriage, stop
at the hotels, and be led to the points of interest by your guide, but
to shoulder your knapsack, or take up your valise, and make a pedestrian
tour through the hamlets and villages. Take a room at a hotel in the
principal cities if you will, and see all that your guide book commands
you to seek, and then start on your own tour of investigation, and
believe me you will enjoy your independent walks and chats with the
villagers and peasants, infinitely more than your visits dictated by
others. Of course, to enjoy this mode of traveling, you must have some
knowledge of the language, and if you start with only a very slight
acquaintance with it, you will be surprised to find how rapidly you will
acquire the power to converse, when you are thus forced to speak in that
language, or be entirely silent.

Your pocket, too, will be the gainer by the power to arrange your own
affairs. If you travel with a courier and depend upon him to arrange
your hotel bills and other matters, you will be cheated by every one,
from the boy who blacks your boots, to the magnificent artist, who
undertakes to fill your picture gallery with the works of the “old
masters.” If Murillo, Raphael, and Guido could see the pictures brought
annually to this country as genuine works of their pencils, we are
certain that they would tear their ghostly hair, wring their shadowy
hands, and return to the tomb again in disgust. Ignorant of the language
of the country you are visiting, you will be swindled in the little
villages and the large cities by the inn-keepers and the hack-drivers,
in the country and in the town, morning, noon, and evening, daily,
hourly, and weekly; so, again I say, study the languages if you propose
going abroad.

In a foreign country nothing stamps the difference between the gentleman
and the clown more strongly than the regard they pay to foreign
customs. While the latter will exclaim against every strange dress or
dish, and even show signs of disgust if the latter does not please him,
the former will endeavor, as far as is in his power, to “do in Rome as
Romans do.”

Accustom yourself, as soon as possible, to the customs of the nation
which you are visiting, and, as far as you can without any violation of
principle, follow them. You will add much to your own comfort by so
doing, for, as you cannot expect the whole nation to conform to your
habits, the sooner you fall in with theirs the sooner you will feel at
home in the strange land.

Never ridicule or blame any usage which seems to you ludicrous or wrong.
You may wound those around you, or you may anger them, and it cannot add
to the pleasure of your visit to make yourself unpopular. If in Germany
they serve your meat upon marmalade, or your beef raw, or in Italy give
you peas in their pods, or in France offer you frog’s legs and
horsesteaks, if you cannot eat the strange viands, make no remarks and
repress every look or gesture of disgust. Try to adapt your taste to the
dishes, and if you find that impossible, remove those articles you
cannot eat from your plate, and make your meal upon the others, but do
this silently and quietly, endeavoring not to attract attention.

The best travelers are those who can eat cats in China, oil in
Greenland, frogs in France, and maccaroni in Italy; who can smoke a
meershaum in Germany, ride an elephant in India, shoot partridges in
England, and wear a turban in Turkey; in short, in every nation adapt
their habits, costume, and taste to the national manners, dress and
dishes.

Do not, when abroad, speak continually in praise of your own country, or
disparagingly of others. If you find others are interested in gaining
information about America, speak candidly and freely of its customs,
scenery, or products, but not in a way that will imply a contempt of
other countries. To turn up your nose at the Thames because the
Mississippi is longer and wider, or to sneer at _any_ object because you
have seen its superior at home, is rude, ill-bred, and in excessively
bad taste. You will find abroad numerous objects of interest which
America cannot parallel, and while abroad, you will do well to avoid
mention of “our rivers,” “our mountains,” or, “our manufactories.” You
will find ruins in Rome, pictures in Florence, cemeteries in France, and
factories in England, which will take the lead and challenge the world
to compete; and you will exhibit a far better spirit if you candidly
acknowledge that superiority, than if you make absurd and untrue
assertions of “our” power to excel them.

You will, of course, meet with much to disapprove, much that will excite
your laughter; but control the one and keep silence about the other. If
you find fault, do so gently and quietly; if you praise, do so without
qualification, sincerely and warmly.

Study well the geography of any country which you may visit, and, as far
as possible, its history also. You cannot feel much interest in
localities or monuments connected with history, if you are unacquainted
with the events which make them worthy of note.

Converse with any who seem disposed to form an acquaintance. You may
thus pass an hour or two pleasantly, obtain useful information, and you
need not carry on the acquaintance unless you choose to do so. Amongst
the higher circles in Europe you will find many of the customs of each
nation in other nations, but it is among the peasants and the people
that you find the true nationality.

You may carry with you one rule into every country, which is, that,
however much the inhabitants may object to your dress, language, or
habits, they will cheerfully acknowledge that the American stranger is
perfectly amiable and polite.




CHAPTER X.

ETIQUETTE IN CHURCH.


It is not, in this book, a question, what you must believe, but how you
must act. If your conscience permits you to visit other churches than
your own, your first duty, whilst in them, is not to sneer or scoff at
any of its forms, and to follow the service as closely as you can.

To remove your hat upon entering the edifice devoted to the worship of a
Higher Power, is a sign of respect never to be omitted. Many men will
omit in foreign churches this custom so expressive and touching, and by
the omission make others believe them irreverent and foolish, even
though they may act from mere thoughtlessness. If, however, you are in a
country where the head is kept covered, and another form of humility
adopted, you need not fear to follow the custom of those around you. You
will be more respected if you pay deference to their religious views,
than if you undertook to prove your superiority by affecting a contempt
for any form of worship. Enter with your thoughts fixed upon high and
holy subjects, and your face will show your devotion, even if you are
ignorant of the forms of that particular church.

If you are with a lady, in a catholic church, offer her the holy water
with your hand ungloved, for, as it is in the intercourse with princes,
