"Then the line is not straight!" the lawyer retorted shrewdly.
"However, if I have been too warm, I beg pardon, my lord."

"I'll bear it in mind," Audley answered. "Very good. And now,
good-night, Stubbs. Don't forget to send the letter to John Audley as
soon as you reach London."

Stubbs replied that he would, and took his leave. He had said his say
on the borough question, lord or no lord; which to a Briton--and he
was a typical Briton--was a satisfaction.

But half an hour later, when he had drawn his nightcap down to his
ears and stood, the extinguisher in his hand, he paused. "He's a sober
hand for a young man," he thought, "a very sober hand. I warrant he
will never run his ship on the rocks for lack of a good look-out!"




                              CHAPTER IV

                            HOMEWARD BOUND


In the corner of the light diligence, seating six inside, which had
brought her from Montreuil, Mary Audley leant forward, looking out
through the dingy panes for the windmills of Calais. Joséphine slept
in the corner facing her, as she had slept for two hours past. Their
companions, a French shopkeeper and her child, and an English bagman,
sighed and fidgeted, as travellers had cause to sigh and fidget in
days when he was lucky who covered the distance from Paris to Calais
in twenty-five hours. The coach rumbled on. The sun had set, a small
rain was falling. The fading light tinged the plain of the Pas de
Calais with a melancholy which little by little dyed the girl's
thoughts.

She was on her way to her own country, to those on whom she might be
dependent without shame. And common sense, of which she had a large
share, told her that she had cause, great cause to be thankful. But
the flush of relief, to which the opening prospect had given rise, was
ebbing. The life before her was new, those amongst whom she must lead
that life were strange; nor did the cold phrases of her uncle's
invitation, which ignored both her father and the letters that she had
written, promise an over-warm welcome.

Still, "Courage!" Mary murmured to herself, "Courage!" And she
recalled a saying which she had learned from the maid, "At the worst,
ten fingers!" Then, seeing that at last they were entering the streets
of the town and that the weary journey was over--she had left Paris
the day before--she touched Joséphine. "We are there," she said.

The maid awoke with her eyes on the bagman, who was stout. "Ah!" she
muttered. "In England they are like that! No wonder that they travel
seeing that their bones are so padded! But, for me I am one ache."

They jolted over the uneven pavement, crossed a bridge, lumbered
through streets scarcely wider than the swaying diligence, at last
with a great cracking of whips they swerved to the left and drew up
amid the babel of the quay. In a twinkling they were part of it.
Porters dragged down, fought for, snatched up their baggage.
English-speaking touts shook dirty cards in their faces. Tide-waiters
bawled questions in their ears. The postilion, the conductor, all the
world stretched greedy palms under their noses. Other travellers ran
into them, and they ran into other travellers. All this, in the dusk,
in the rain, while the bell on the deck overhead clanged above the
roar of the escaping steam, and a man shouted without ceasing, "Tower
steamer! Tower steamer! Any more for England?"

Joséphine, after one bitter exchange of words with a lad who had
seized her handbag, thrust her fingers into her ears and resigned
herself. Even Mary for a moment was aghast. She was dragged this way
and that, she lost one article and recovered it, lost another and
recovered that, she lost her ticket and rescued it from a man's hand.
At last, her baggage on board, she found herself breathless at the
foot of the ladder, with three passengers imploring her to ascend, and
six touts clinging to her skirts and crying for drink-money. She had
barely time to make her little gift to the kind-hearted maid--who was
returning to Paris by the night coach--and no time to thank her,
before they were parted. Mary was pushed up the ladder. In a moment
she was looking down from the deck on the wet, squalid quay, the pale
up-turned faces, the bustling crowd.

She picked out the one face which she knew, and which it pained her to
lose. By gestures and smiles, with a tear in the eye, she tried to
make amends to Joséphine for the hasty parting, the half-spoken words.
The maid on her side was in tears, and after the French fashion was
proud of them. So the last minute came. The paddles were already
turning, the ship was going slowly astern, when a man pushed his way
through the crowd. He clutched the ladder as it was unhooked, and at
some risk and much loss of dignity he was bundled on board. There was
a lamp amidships, and, as he regained his balance, Mary, smiling in
spite of herself, saw that he was an Englishman, a man about thirty,
and plainly dressed. Then in her anxiety to see the last of Joséphine
she crossed the deck as the ship went about, and she lost sight of
him.

She continued to look back and to wave her handkerchief, until
nothing remained but a light or two in a bank of shadow. That was the
last she was to see of the land which had been her home for ten years;
and chilled and lonely she turned about and did what, had she been
an older traveller, she would have done before. She sought the
after-cabin. Alas, a glance from the foot of the companion was enough!
Every place was taken, every couch occupied, and the air, already
close, repelled her. She climbed to the deck again, and was seeking
some corner where she could sit, sheltered from the wind and rain,
when the captain saw her and fell foul of her.

"Now, young lady," he said, "no woman's allowed on deck at night!"

"Oh, but," she protested, "there's no room downstairs!"

"Won't do," he answered roughly. "Lost a woman overboard once, and as
much trouble about her as about all the men, drunk or sober, I've ever
carried. All women below, all women below, is the order! Besides,"
more amicably, as he saw by a ray of lantern-light that she was young
and comely, "it's wet, my dear, and going to be d--d wet, and as dark
as Wapping!"

"But I've a cloak," she petitioned, "if I sit quite still, and----"

A tall form loomed up at the captain's elbow. "This is the lady I am
looking for," the new-comer said. "It will be all right, Captain
Jones."

The captain turned sharply. "Oh, my lord," he said, "I didn't know;
but with petticoats and a dark night, blest if you know where you are!
I'm sure I beg the young lady's pardon. Quite right, my lord, quite
right!" With a rough salute he went forward and the darkness swallowed
him.

"Lord Audley?" Mary said. She spoke quietly, but to do so she had to
steady her voice.

"Yes," he replied. "I knew that you were crossing to-night, and as I
had to go over this week I chose this evening. I've reserved a cabin
for you."

"Oh, but," she remonstrated, "I don't think you should have done that!
I don't know that I can----"

"Afford it?" he said coolly. "Then--as it is a matter of some
shillings--your kinsman will presume to pay for it."

It was a small thing, and she let it pass. "But who told you," she
asked, "that I was crossing to-night?"

"The Princess. You don't feel, I suppose, that as you are crossing, it
was my duty to stay in France?"

"Oh no!" she protested.

"But you are not sure whether you are more pleased or more vexed?
Well, let me show you where your cabin is--it is the size of a
milliner's box, but by morning you will be glad of it, and that may
turn the scale. Moreover," as he led the way across the deck, "the
steward's boy, when he is not serving gin below, will serve tea above,
and at sea tea is not to be scorned. That's your number--7. And there
is the boy. Boy!" he called in a voice that ensured obedience, "Tea
and bread and butter for this lady in number 7 in an hour. See it is
there, my lad!"

She smiled. "I think the tea and bread and butter may turn the scale,"
she said.

"Right," he replied. "Then, as it is only eight o'clock, why should we
not sit in the shelter of this tarpaulin? I see that there are two
seats. They might have been put for us."

"Is it possible that they were?" she asked shrewdly. "Well, why not?"

She had no reason to give--and the temptation was great. Five minutes
before she had been the most lonely creature in the world. The parting
from Joséphine, the discomfort of the boat, the dark sea and the
darker horizon, the captain's rough words, had brought the tears to
her eyes. And then, in a moment, to be thought of, provided for,
kindly entreated, to be lapped in attentions as in a cloak--in very
fact, in another second a warm cloak was about her--who could expect
her to refuse this? Moreover, he was her kinsman; probably she owed it
to him that she was here.

At any rate she thought that it would be prudish to demur, and she
took one of the seats in the lee of the screen. Audley tucked the
cloak about her, and took the other. The light of a lantern fell on
their faces and the few passengers who still tramped the windy deck
could see the pair, and doubtless envied him their shelter. "Are you
comfortable?" he inquired--but before she could answer he whistled
softly.

"What is it?" Mary asked.

"Not much." He laughed to himself.

Then she saw coming along the deck towards them a man who had not
found his sea-legs. As he approached he took little runs, and now
brought up against the rail, now clutched at a stay. Mary knew the man
again. "He nearly missed the boat," she whispered.

"Did he?" her companion answered in the same tone. "Well, if he had
quite missed it, I'd have forgiven him. He is going to be ill, I'll
wager!"

When the man was close to them he reeled, and to save himself he
grasped the end of their screen. His eyes met theirs. He was past much
show of emotion, but his voice rose as he exclaimed, "Audley. Is that
you?"

"It is. We are in for a rough night, I'm afraid."

"And--pardon me," the stranger hesitated, peering at them, "is that
Miss Audley with you?"

"Yes," Mary said, much surprised.

"Oh!"

"This is Mr. Basset," Audley explained. Mary stared at the stranger.
The name conveyed nothing to her.

"I came to meet you," he said, speaking with difficulty, and now and
again casting a wild eye abroad as the deck heaved under him. "But I
expected to find you at the hotel, and I waited there until I nearly
missed the boat. Even then I felt that I ought to learn if you were on
board, and I came up to see."

"I am very much obliged to you," Mary answered politely, "but I am
quite comfortable, thank you. It is close below, and Lord Audley found
this seat for me. And I have a cabin."

"Oh yes!" he answered. "I think I will go down then if you--if you are
sure you want nothing."

"Nothing, thank you," Mary answered with decision.

"I think I--I'll go, then. Good-night!"

With that he went, making desperate tacks in the direction of the
companion. Unfortunately what he gained in speed he lost in dignity,
and before he reached the hatch Lord Audley gave way to laughter.

"Oh, don't!" Mary cried. "He will hear you. And it was kind of him to
look for me when he was not well."

But Audley only laughed the more. "You don't catch the full flavor of
it," he said. "He's come three hundred miles to meet you, and he's too
ill to do anything now he's here!"

"Three hundred miles to meet me!" she cried in astonishment.

"Every yard of it! Don't you know who he is? He's Peter Basset, your
uncle's nephew by marriage, who lives with him. He's come, or rather
your uncle has sent him, all the way from Stafford to meet you--and
he's gone to lie down! He's gone to lie down! There's a squire of
dames for you! Upon my honor, I never knew anything richer!"

And my lord's laughter broke out anew.




                              CHAPTER V

                          THE LONDON PACKET


Mary laughed with him, but she was not comfortable. What she had seen
of the stranger, a man plain in feature and ordinary in figure, one
whom the eye would not have remarked in a crowd, did not especially
commend him. And certainly he had not shown himself equal to a
difficult situation. But the effort he had made to come to her help
appealed to her generosity, and she was not sure how far she formed a
part of the comedy. So her laughter was from the lips only, and brief.
Then, "My uncle's nephew?" she asked thoughtfully.

"His wife's nephew. Your uncle married a Basset."

"But why did he send him to meet me?"

"For a simple reason--I should say that he had no one else to send.
Your uncle is not a man of many friends."

"I understood that some one would meet the boat in London," she said.
"But I expected a woman."

"I fancy the woman would be to seek," he replied. "And Basset is a
kind of tame cat at the Gatehouse. He lives there a part of the year,
though he has an old place of his own up the country. He's a
Staffordshire man born and bred, and I dare say a good fellow in his
way, but a dull dog! a dull dog! Are you sure that the wind does not
catch you?"

She said that she was very comfortable, and they were silent awhile,
listening to the monotonous slapping of a rope against the mast and
the wash of the waves as they surged past the beam. A single light at
the end of the breakwater shone in the darkness behind them. She
marked the light grow smaller and more distant, and her thoughts went
back to the convent school, to her father, to the third-floor where
for a time they had been together, to his care for her--feeble and
inefficient, to his illness. And a lump rose in her throat, her hands
gripped one another as she strove to hide her feelings. In her heart
she whispered a farewell. She was turning her back on her father's
grave. The last tendril which bound her to the old life was breaking.

The light vanished, and gradually the girl's reflections sought a new
channel. They turned from the past to the present, and dwelt on the
man beside her, who had not only thought of her comfort, who had not
only saved her from some hours of loneliness, but had probably wrought
this change in her life. This was the third time only that she had
seen him. Once, some days after that memorable evening, he had called
at the Hôtel Lambert, and her employer had sent for her. He had
greeted her courteously in the Princess's presence, had asked her
kindly if she had heard from England, and had led her to believe that
she would hear. And she remembered with a blush that the Princess had
looked from one to the other with a smile, and afterwards had had
another manner for her.

Meanwhile the man wondered what she was thinking, and waited for her
to give him the clue. But she was so long silent that his patience
wore thin. It was not for this, it was not to sit silent beside her,
that he had taken a night journey and secured these cosey seats.

"Well?" he said at last.

She turned to him, her eyes wet with tears. "It seems so strange," she
murmured, "to be leaving all and going into a world in which I know no
one."

"Except the head of your family."

"Except you! I suppose that I owe it to you that I am here?"

"I should be happy if I thought so," he replied, with careful
reticence. "But we set a stone rolling, we do not know where it falls.
You will soon learn--Basset will tell you, if I don't--that your uncle
and I are not on good terms. Therefore it is unlikely that he was
moved by what I said."

"But you said something?"

"If I did," he answered, smiling, "it was against the grain--who likes
to put his finger between the door and the jamb? And let me caution
you. Your uncle will not suffer meddling on my part, still less a
reminder of it. Therefore, as you are going to owe all to him, you
will do well to be silent about me."

She was sure that she owed all to him, and she might have said so, but
at that moment the boat changed its course and the full force of the
wind struck them. The salt spray whipped and stung their faces. Her
cloak flew out like a balloon, her scarf pennon-wise, the tarpaulin
flapped like some huge bird. He had to spring to the screen, to adjust
it to the new course, to secure and tuck in her cloak--and all in
haste, with exclamations and laughter, while Mary, sharing the joy of
the struggle, and braced by the sting of the salt wind, felt her heart
rise. How kind he was, and how strong. How he towered above ordinary
men. How safe she felt in his care.

When they were settled anew, she asked him to tell her something about
the Gatehouse.

"It's a lonely place," he said. "It is quite out of the world. I don't
know, indeed, how you will exist after the life you have led."

"The life I have led!" she protested. "But that is absurd! Though you
saw me in the Princess's salon, you know that my life had nothing in
common with hers. I was downstairs no more than three or four times,
and then merely to interpret. My life was spent between whitewashed
walls, on bare floors. I slept in a room with twenty children, ate
with forty--onion soup and thick tartines. The evening I saw you I
wore shoes which the maid lent me. And with all that I was thankful,
most thankful, to have such a refuge. The great people who met at the
Princess's----"

"And who thought that they were making history!" he laughed. "Did you
know that? Did you know that the Princess was looking to them to save
the last morsel of Poland?"

"No," she said. "I did not know. I am very ignorant. But if I were a
man, I should love to do things like that."

"I believe you would!" he replied. "Well, there are crusades in
England. Only I fear that you will not be in the way of them."

"And I am not a princess! But tell me, please, what are they?"

"You will not be long before you come upon one," he replied, a hint of
derision in his tone. "You will see a placard in the streets, '_Shall
the people's bread be taxed?_' Not quite so romantic as the
independence of Poland? But I can tell you that heads are quite as
likely to be broken over it."

"Surely," she said, "there can be only one answer to that."

"Just so," he replied dryly. "But what is the answer? The land
claims high prices that it may thrive; the towns claim cheap bread
that they may live. Each says that the country depends upon it.
'England self-supporting!' says one. 'England the workshop of the
world!' says the other."

"I begin to see."

"'The land is the strength of the country,' argues the squire. 'Down
with monopoly,' cries the cotton lord. Then each arms himself with a
sword lately forged and called 'Philanthropy,' and with that he
searches for chinks in the other's armor. 'See how factories work the
babes, drive the women underground, ruin the race,' shout the squires.
'Vote for the land and starvation wages,' shout the mill-owners."

"But does no one try to find the answer?" she asked timidly. "Try to
find out what is best for the people?"

"Ah!" he rejoined, "if by the people you mean the lower classes, they
cry, 'Give us not bread, but votes!' And the squires say that that is
what the traders who have just got votes don't mean to give them; and
so, to divert their attention, dangle cheap bread before their noses!"

Mary sighed. "I am afraid that I must give it up," she said. "I am so
ignorant."

"Well," he replied thoughtfully. "Many are puzzled which side to take,
and are waiting to see how the cat jumps. In the meantime every fence
is placarded with 'Speed the Plough!' on one side, and 'The Big Loaf!'
on the other. The first man you meet thinks the landlord a devourer of
widows' houses; to the next the mill-owner is an ogre grinding men's
bones to make his bread. Even at the Gatehouse I doubt if you will
escape the excitement, though there is not a field of wheat within a
mile of it!"

"To me it is like a new world," she said.

"Then, when you are in the new world," he replied, smiling as he rose,
"do not forget Columbus! But here is the lad to tell you that your tea
is ready."

He repented when Mary had left him that he had not made better use of
his time. It had been his purpose to make such an impression on the
girl as might be of use in the future, and he wondered why he had not
devoted himself more singly to this; why he had allowed minutes which
might have been given to intimate subjects to be wasted in a dry
discussion. But there was a quality in Mary that did not lightly
invite to gallantry--a gravity and a balance that, had he looked
closely into the matter, might have explained his laches.

And in fact he had builded better than he knew, for while he
reproached himself, Mary, safe within the tiny bathing machine which
the packet company called a cabin, was giving much thought to him. The
dip-candle, set within a horn lantern, threw its light on the one
comfortable object, the tea-tray, seated beside which she reviewed
what had happened, and found it all interesting; his meeting with her,
his thought for her, the glimpses he had given her of things beyond
the horizon of the convent school, even his diversion into politics.
He was not on good terms with her uncle, and it was unlikely that she
would see more of him. But she was sure that she would always remember
his appearance on the threshold of her new life, that she would always
recall with gratitude this crossing and the kindness which had lapped
her about and saved her from loneliness.

In her eyes he figured as one of the brilliant circle of the Hôtel
Lambert. For her he played a part in great movements and high
enterprises such as those which he had revealed to her. His light
treatment of them, his air of detachment, had, indeed, chilled her at
times; but these were perhaps natural in one who viewed from above and
from a distance the ills which it was his task to treat. How ignorant
he must think her! How remote from the plane on which he lived, the
standards by which he judged, the objects at which he aimed! Yet he
had stooped to explain things to her and to make them clear.

She spent an hour deep in thought, and, strange as the life of the
ship was to her, she was deaf to the creaking of the timbers, and the
surge of the waves as they swept past the beam. At intervals hoarse
orders, a rush of feet across the deck, the more regular tramp of rare
passengers, caught her attention, only to lose it as quickly. It was
late when she roused herself. She saw that the candle was burning low,
and she began to make her arrangements for the night.

Midway in them she paused, and colored, aware that she knew his tread
from the many that had passed. The footstep ceased. A hand tapped at
her door. "Yes?" she said.

"We shall be in the river by daybreak," Audley announced. "I thought
that you might like to come on deck early. You ought not to miss the
river from the Nore to the Pool."

"Thank you," she answered.

"You shouldn't miss it," he persisted. "Greenwich especially!"

"I shall be there," she replied. "It is very good of you. Good-night."

He went away. After all, he was the only man on board shod like a
gentleman; it had been odd if she had not known his step! And for
going on deck early, why should she not? Was she to miss Greenwich
because Lord Audley went to a good bootmaker?

So when Peter Basset, still pale and qualmish, came on deck in the
early morning, a little below the Pool, the first person he saw was
the girl whom he had come to escort. She was standing high above him
on the captain's bridge, her hands clasping the rail, her hair blown
about and shining golden in the sunshine. Lord Audley's stately form
towered above her. He was pointing out this and that, and they were
talking gaily; and now and again the captain spoke to them, and many
were looking at them. She did not see Basset; he was on the deck
below, standing amid the common crowd, and so he was free to look at
her as he pleased. He might be said not to have seen her before, and
what he saw now bewildered, nay, staggered him. Unwillingly, and to
please his uncle, he had come to meet a girl of whom they knew no more
than this, that, rescued from some backwater of Paris life, into which
a weak and shiftless father had plunged her, she had earned her
living, if she had earned it at all, in a dependent capacity. He had
looked to find her one of two things; either flashy and underbred,
with every fault an Englishman might consider French, or a nice
mixture of craft and servility. He had not been able to decide which
he would prefer.

Instead he saw a girl tall, slender, and slow of movement, with eyes
set under a fine width of brow and grave when they smiled, a chin
fuller than perfect beauty required, a mouth a little large, a perfect
nose. Auburn hair, thick and waving, drooped over each temple, and
framed a face as calm as it was fair. "Surely a pearl found on a
midden!" he thought. And as the thought passed through his mind, Mary
looked down. Her eyes roved for a moment over the crowded deck, where
some, like Basset, returned her gaze with interest, while others
sought their baggage or bawled for missing companions. He was not a
man, it has been said, to stand out in a crowd, and her eyes travelled
over him without seeing him. Audley spoke to her, she lifted her eyes,
she looked ashore again. But the unheeding glance which had not
deigned to know him stung Basset! He dubbed her, with all her beauty,
proud and hard. Still--to be such and to have sprung from such a life!
It was marvellous.

He knew nothing of the convent school with its hourly discipline
lasting through years. He did not guess that the obstinacy which had
been weakness in the father was strength in the child. Much less could
he divine that the improvidence of that father had become a beacon,
warning the daughter off the rocks which had been fatal to him! Mary
was no miracle, but neither was she proud or hard.

They had passed Erith, and Greenwich with its stately pile and formal
gardens glittering in the sunshine of an April morning. The ripple of
a westerly wind, meeting the flood, silvered the turbid surface. A
hundred wherries skimmed like water-flies hither and thither, long
lines of colliers fringed the wharves, tall China clippers forged
slowly up under a scrap of foresail, dumb barges deep laden with hay
or Barclay's Entire, moved mysteriously with the tide. On all sides
hoarse voices bawled orders or objurgations. Charmed with the gayety,
the movement, the color, Mary could not take her eyes from the scene.
The sunshine, the leap of life, the pulse of spring, moved in her
blood and put to flight the fears that had weighed on her at
nightfall. She told herself with elation that this was England, this
was her native land, this was her home.

Meanwhile Audley's mind took another direction. He reflected that in a
few minutes he must part from the girl, and must trust henceforth to
the impression he had made. For some hours he had scarcely given a
thought to Basset, but he recalled him now, and he searched for him in
the throng below. He found him at last, pressed against the rail
between a fat woman with a basket and a crying child. Their eyes met.
My lord glanced away, but he could not refrain from a smile as he
pictured the poor affair the other had made of his errand. And
Basset saw the smile and read its meaning, and though he was not
self--assertive, though he was, indeed, backward to a fault, anger ran
through his veins. To have travelled three hundred miles in order to
meet this girl, to have found her happy in another's company, and to
have accepted the second place--the position had vexed him even under
the qualms of illness. This morning, and since he had seen her, it
stirred in him an unwonted resentment. He d--d Audley under his
breath, disengaged himself from the basket which the fat woman was
thrusting into his ribs, lifted the child aside. He escaped below to
collect his effects.

But in a short time he recovered his temper. When the boat began to go
about in the crowded Pool and Mary reluctantly withdrew her eyes from
the White Tower, darkened by the smoke and the tragedies of twenty
generations, she found him awaiting them at the foot of the ladder. He
was still pale, and the girl's conscience smote her. For many hours
she had not given him a thought. "I hope you are better," she said
gently.

"Horrid thing, _mal de mer!_" remarked my lord, with a gleam of humor
in his eye.

"Thank you, I am quite right this morning," Basset answered.

"You go from Euston Grove, I suppose?"

"Yes. The morning train starts in a little over an hour."

No more was said, and they went ashore together. Audley, an old
traveller, and one whose height and presence gave weight to his
orders, saw to Mary's safety in the crowd, shielded her from touts and
tide-waiters, took the upper hand. He watched the aproned porters
disappearing with the baggage in the direction of the Custom House,
and a thought struck him. "I am sorry that my servant is not here," he
said. "He would see our things through without troubling us." His eyes
met Basset's.

Basset disdained to refuse. "I will do it," he said. He received the
keys and followed the baggage.

Audley looked at Mary and laughed. "I think you'll find him useful,"
he said. "Takes a hint and is not too forward."

"For shame!" she cried. "It is very good of him to go." But she could
not refrain from a smile.

"Well trained," Audley continued in a whimsical tone, "fetches and
carries, barks at the name of Peel and growls at the name of Cobden,
gives up a stick when required, could be taught to beg--by the right
person."

She laughed--she could not resist his manner. "But you are not very
kind," she said. "Please to call a--whatever we need. He shall not do
everything."

"Everything?" Lord Audley echoed. "He should do nothing," in a lower
tone, "if I had my way."

Mary blushed.




                              CHAPTER VI

                           FIELD AND FORGE


The window of the clumsy carriage was narrow, but Mary gazed through
it as if she could never see enough of the flying landscape, the
fields, the woods, the ivy-clad homes and red-roofed towns that passed
in procession before her. The emotions of those who journeyed for the
first time on a railway at a speed four times as great as that of the
swiftest High-flier that ever devoured the road are forgotten by this
generation. But they were vivid. The thing was a miracle. And though
by this time men had ceased to believe that he who passed through the
air at sixty miles an hour must of necessity cease to breathe, the
novice still felt that he could never tire of the panorama so swiftly
unrolled before him.

And it was not only wonder, it was admiration that held Mary chained
to the window. Her infancy had been spent in a drab London street, her
early youth in the heart of a Paris which was still gloomy and
mediæval. Some beautiful things she had seen on fête days, the
bend of the river at Meudon or St. Germain, and once the Forest
of Fontainebleau; on Sundays the Bois. But the smiling English
meadows, the gray towers of village churches, the parks and lawns of
manor-houses, the canals with their lines of painted barges, and here
and there a gay packet boat--she drank in the beauty of these, and
more than once her eyes grew dim. For a time Basset, seated in the
opposite corner, did not exist for her; while he, behind the _Morning
Chronicle_, made his observations and took note of her at his leisure.
The longer he looked the more he marvelled.

He asked himself with amusement what John Audley would think of her
when he, too, should see her. He anticipated the old man's surprise on
finding her so remote from their preconceived ideas of her. He
wondered what she would think of John Audley.

And while he pondered, and now scanned his paper without reading it,
and now stole another glance at her, he steeled himself against her.
She might not have been to blame, it might not have been her fault;
but, between them, the two on the boat had put him in his place and he
could not forget it. He had cut a poor figure, and he resented it. He
foresaw that in the future she would be dependent on him for society,
and he would be a fool if he then forgot the lesson he had learned.
She had a good face, but probably her up-bringing had been anything
but good. Probably it had taught her to make the most of the moment
and of the man of the moment, and he would be foolish if he let her
amuse herself with him. He had seen in what light she viewed him when
other game was afoot, and he would deserve the worst if he did not
remember this.

Presently an embankment cut off the view, and she withdrew her eyes
from the window. In her turn she took the measure of her companion. It
seemed to her that his face was too thoughtful for his years, and that
his figure was insignificant. The eye which had accustomed itself to
Lord Audley's port and air found Basset slight and almost mean. She
smiled as she recalled the skill with which my lord had set him aside
and made use of him.

Still, he was a part of the life to which she was hastening, and
curiosity stirred in her. He was in possession, he was in close
relations with her uncle, he knew many things which she was anxious to
know. Much of her comfort might depend on him. Presently she asked him
what her uncle was like.

"You will see for yourself in a few hours," he replied, his tone cold
and almost ungracious. "Did not Lord Audley describe him?"

"No. And you seem," with a faint smile, "to be equally on your guard,
Mr. Basset."

"Not at all," he retorted. "But I think it better to leave you to
judge for yourself. I have lived too near to Mr. Audley to--to
criticise him."

She colored.

"Let me give you one hint, however," he continued in the same dry
tone; "you will be wise not to mention Lord Audley to him. They are
not on good terms."

"I am sorry."

He shrugged his shoulders. "It cannot be said to be unnatural, after
what has happened."

She considered this. "What has happened?" she asked after a pause.

"Well, the claim to the peerage, if nothing else----"

"What claim?" she asked. "Whose claim? What peerage? I am quite in the
dark."

He stared. He did not believe her. "Your uncle's claim," he said
curtly. Then as she still looked a question, "You must know," he
continued, "that your uncle claimed the title which Lord Audley bears,
and the property which goes with it. And that the decision was only
given against him three months ago."

"I know nothing of it," she said. "I never heard of the claim."

"Really?" he replied. He hardly deigned to veil his incredulity. "Yet
if your uncle had succeeded you were the next heir."

"I?"

"Yes, you."

Then her face shook his unbelief. She turned slowly and painfully red.
"Is it possible?" she said. "You are not playing with me?"

"Certainly I am not. Do you mean that Lord Audley never told you that?
Never told you that you were interested?"

"Never! He only told me that he was not on good terms with my uncle,
and that for that reason he would leave me to learn the rest at the
Gatehouse."

"Well, that was right," Basset answered. "It is as well, since you
have to live with Mr. Audley, that you should not be prejudiced
against him."

"No doubt," she said dryly. "But I do not understand why he did not
answer my letters."

"Did you write to him?"

"Twice." She was going to explain the circumstances, but she
refrained. Why appeal to the sympathies of one who seemed so cold, so
distant, so indifferent?

"He cannot have had the letters," Basset decided after a pause.

"Then how did he come to write to me at last?"

"Lord Audley sent your address to him."

"Ah!" she said. "I supposed so." With an air of finality she turned to
the window, and for some time she was silent. Her mind had much upon
which to work.

She was silent for so long that before more was said they were running
through the outskirts of Birmingham, and Mary awoke with a shock to
another and sadder side of England. In place of parks and homesteads
she saw the England of the workers--workers at that time exploited to
the utmost in pursuance of a theory of economy that heeded only the
wealth of nations, and placed on that wealth the narrowest meaning.
They passed across squalid streets, built in haste to meet the needs
of new factories, under tall chimneys the smoke of which darkened the
sky without hindrance, by vile courts, airless and almost sunless.
They looked down on sallow children whose only playground was the
street and whose only school-bell was the whistle that summoned them
at dawn to premature toil. Haggard women sat on doorsteps with puling
babes in their arms. Lines of men, whose pallor peered through the
grime, propped the walls, or gazed with apathy at the train. For a few
minutes Mary forgot not only her own hopes and fears, but the
aloofness and even the presence of her companion. When they came to a
standstill in the station, where they had to change on to the Grand
Junction Railway, Basset had to speak twice before she understood that
he wished her to leave the carriage.

"What a dreadful place!" she exclaimed.

"Well, it is not beautiful," Basset admitted. "One does not look for
beauty in Birmingham and the Black Country."

He got her some tea, and marshalled her carefully to the upper line.
But his answer had jarred upon her, and when they were again seated,
Mary kept her thoughts to herself. Beyond Birmingham their route
skirted towns rather than passed through them, but she saw enough to
deepen the impression which the lanes and alleys of that place had
made upon her. The sun had set and the cold evening light revealed in
all their meanness the rows of naked cottages, the heaps of slag and
cinders, the starveling horses that stood with hanging heads on the
dreary lands. As darkness fell, fires shone out here and there, and
threw into Dantesque relief the dark forms of half-naked men toiling
with fury to feed the flames. The change which an hour had made in all
she saw seemed appalling to the girl; it filled her with awe and
sadness. Here, so near the paradise of the country and the plough, was
the Inferno of the town, the forge, the pit! Here, in place of the
thatched cottage and the ruddy faces, were squalor and sunken cheeks
and misery and dearth.

She thought of the question which Lord Audley had raised twenty-four
hours before, and which he had told her was racking the minds of
men--should food be taxed? And she fancied that there was, there could
be, but one answer. These toiling masses, these slaves of the hammer
and the pick, must be fed, and, surely, so fed that a margin, however
small, however meagre, might be saved out of which to better their
sordid lot.

"We call this the Black Country," Basset explained, feeling the
silence irksome. After all, she was in his charge, in a way she was
his guest. He ought to amuse her.

"It is well named," she answered. "Is there anything in England worse
than this?"

"Well, round Hales Owen and Dudley," he rejoined, "it may be worse.
And at Cradley Heath it may be rougher. More women and children are
employed in the pits; and where women make chains--well, it's pretty
bad."

She had spoken dryly to hide her feelings. He replied in a tone as
matter-of-fact, through lack of feeling. For this he was not so much
to blame as she fancied, for that which horrified her was to him an
everyday matter, one of the facts of life with which he had been
familiar from boyhood. But she did not understand this. She judged him
and condemned him. She did not speak again.

By and by, "We shall be at Penkridge in twenty minutes," he said.
"After that a nine-miles drive will take us to the Gatehouse, and your
journey will be over. But I fear that you will find the life quiet
after Paris."

"I was very quiet in Paris."

"But you were in a large house."

"I was at the Princess Czartoriski's."

"Of course. I suppose it was there that you met Lord Audley?"

"Yes."

"Well, after that kind of life, I am afraid that the Gatehouse will
have few charms for you. It is very remote, very lonely."

She cut him short with impatience, the color rising to her face. "I
thought you understood," she said, "that I was in the Princess's house
as a governess? It was my business to take care of a number of
children, to eat with them, to sleep with them, to see that they
washed their hands and kept their hair clean. That was my position,
Mr. Basset. I do not wish it to be misunderstood."

"But if that were so," he stammered, "how did you----"

"Meet Lord Audley," she replied. "Very simply. Once or twice the
Princess ordered me to descend to the salon to interpret. On one of
these occasions Lord Audley saw me and learned--who I was."

"Indeed," he said. "I see." Perhaps he had had it in his mind to test
her and the truth of Audley's letter, which nothing in her or in my
lord's conduct seemed to confirm. He did not know if this had been in
his mind, but in any case the result silenced him. She was either very
honest or very clever. Many girls, he knew, would have slurred over
the facts, and not a few would have boasted of the Princess's
friendship and the Princess's society, and the Princess's hôtel, and
brought up her name a dozen times a day.

She is very clever, he thought, or she is--good. But for the moment he
steeled himself against the latter opinion.

No other travellers alighted at Penkridge, and he went away to claim
the baggage, while she waited, cold and depressed, on the little
platform which, lit by a single oil lamp, looked down on a dim
churchyard. Dusk was passing into night, and the wind, sweeping across
the flat, whipped her skirts and chilled her blood. Her courage sank.
A light or two betrayed the nearness of the town, but in every other
direction dull lines of willows or pale stretches of water ran into
the night.

Five minutes before she had resented Basset's company, now she was
glad to see him return. He led the way to the road in silence. "The
carriage is late," he muttered, but even as he spoke the quick tramp
of a pair of horses pushed to speed broke on them, lights appeared, a
moment later a fly pulled up beside them and turned. "You are late,"
Basset said.

"There!" the man replied. "Minutes might be guineas since trains came
in, dang 'em! Give me the days when five minutes made neither man nor
mouse, and gentry kept their own time."

"Well, let us get off now."

"I ask no better, Squire. Please yourself and you'll please me."

When they were shut in, Basset laughed. "Stafford manners!" he said.
"You'll become used to them!"

"Is this my uncle's carriage?" she asked.

"No," he replied, smiling in the darkness. "He does not keep one."

She said no more. Though she could not see him, her shoulder touched
his, and his nearness and the darkness in which they sat troubled her,
though she was not timid. They rode thus for a minute or two, then
trundled through a narrow street, dimly lit by shop windows; again
they were in the dark and the country. Presently the pace dropped to a
walk as they began to ascend.

She fancied, peering out on her side, that they were winding up
through woods. Branches swept the sides of the carriage. They jolted
into ruts and jolted out of them. By and by they were clear of the
trees and the road seemed to be better. The moon, newly risen, showed
her a dreary upland, bare and endless, here dotted with the dark
stumps of trees, there of a deeper black as if fire had swept over it
and scarred it. They met no one, saw no sign of habitation. To the
girl, accustomed all her life to streets and towns, the place seemed
infinitely desolate--a place of solitude and witches and terror and
midnight murder.

"What is this?" she asked, shivering.

"This is the Great Chase," he said. "Riddsley, on the farther side, is
our nearest town, but since the railway was opened we use Penkridge
Station."

His practical tone steadied her, but she was tired, and the loneliness
which she had felt while she waited on the bleak platform weighed
heavily on her. To what was she going? How would her uncle receive
her? This dreary landscape, the gaunt signpost that looked like a
gibbet and might have been one, the skeleton trees that raised bare
arms to heaven, the scream of a dying rabbit, all added to the
depression of the moment. She was glad when at last the carriage
stopped at a gate. Basset alighted and opened the gate. He stepped in
again, they went on. There were now shadowy trees about them, sparsely
set. They jolted unevenly over turf.

"Are we there?" she asked, a tremor in her voice.

"Very nearly," he said. "Another mile and we shall be there. This is
Beaudelays Park."

She called pride to her aid, and he did not guess--for all day he had
marked her self-possession--that she was trembling. Vainly she told
herself that she was foolish, that nothing could happen to her,
nothing that mattered. What, after all, was a cold reception, what was
her uncle's frown beside the poverty and the hazards from which she
had escaped? Vainly she reassured herself; she could not still the
rapid beating of her heart.

He might have said a word to cheer her. But he did not know that she
was suffering, and he said no word. She came near to hating him for
his stolidity and his silence. He was inhuman! A block!

She peered through the misty glass, striving to see what was before
them. But she could make out no more than the dark limbs of trees, and
now and then a trunk, which shone as the light of the lamp slipped
over it, and as quickly vanished. Suddenly they shot from turf to hard
road, passed through an open gateway, for an instant the lamp on her
side showed a grotesque pillar--they wheeled, they stopped. Within a
few feet of her a door stood open, and in the doorway a girl held a
lantern aloft in one hand, and with the other screened her eyes from
the light.




                             CHAPTER VII

                           MR. JOHN AUDLEY


An hour later Basset was seated on one side of a wide hearth,
on the other John Audley faced him. The library in which they sat was
the room which Basset loved best in the world. It was a room of
silence and large spaces, and except where four windows, tall and
narrow, broke one wall, it was lined high with the companions of
silence--books. The ceiling was of black oak, adorned at the crossings
of the joists and beams with emblems, butterflies, and Stafford knots
and the like, once bright with color, and still soberly rich. A
five-sided bay enlarged each of the two inner corners of the
room and broke the outlines. One of these bays shrined a window,
four-mullioned, the other a spiral staircase. An air of comfort and
stateliness pervaded the whole; here the great scutcheon over the
mantel, there the smaller coats on the chair-backs blended their or
and gules with the hues of old rugs and the dun bindings of old
folios. There were books on the four or five tables, and books on the
Cromwell chairs; and charts and deeds, antique weapons and silver
pieces, all the tools and toys of the antiquary, lay broadcast.
Against the door hung a blazoned pedigree of the Audleys of
Beaudelays. It was six feet long and dull with age.

But Basset, as he faced his companion, was not thinking of the room,
or of the pursuits with which it was connected in his mind, and which,
more than affection and habit, bound him to John Audley. He moved
restlessly in his chair, then stretched his legs to meet the glow of
the wood fire. "All the same," he said, "I think you would have done
well to see her to-night, sir."

"Pooh! pooh!" John Audley answered with lazy good humor. "Why? It
doesn't matter what I think of her or she thinks of me. It's what
Peter thinks of Mary and Mary thinks of Peter that matters. That's
what matters!" He chuckled as he marked the other's annoyance. "She is
a beauty, is she?"

"I didn't say so."

"But you think it. You don't deceive me at this time of day. And
stand-off, is she? That's for the marines and innocent young fellows
like you who think women angels. I'll be bound that she's her mother's
daughter, and knows her value and will see that she fetches it!
Trading blood will out!"

To the eye that looked and glanced away John Audley, lolling in his
chair, in a quilted dressing-gown with silk facings, was a plump and
pleasant figure. His face was fresh-colored, and would have been
comely if the cheeks had not been a little pendulous. His hair was
fine and white and he wore it long, and his hands were shapely and
well cared for. As he said his last word he poured a little brandy
into a glass and filled it up with water. "Here's to the wooing that's
not long adoing!" he said, his eyes twinkling. He seemed to take a
pleasure in annoying the other.

He was so far successful that Basset swore softly. "It's silly to talk
like that," he said, "when I have hardly known the girl twenty-four
hours and have scarcely said ten times as many words to her."

"But you're going to say a good many more words to her!" Audley
retorted, grinning. "Sweet, pretty words, my boy! But there, there,"
he continued, veering between an elfish desire to tease and a desire
equally strong to bring the other to his way of thinking. "I'm only
joking. I know you'll never let that devil have his way! You'll never
leave the course open for _him!_ I know that. But there's no hurry!
There's no hurry. Though, lord, how I sweated when I read his letter!
I had never a wink of sleep the night after."

"I don't suppose that he's given a thought to her in that way," Basset
answered. "Why should he?"

John Audley leant forward, and his face underwent a remarkable change.
It became a pale, heavy mask, out of which his eyes gleamed, small and
malevolent. "Don't talk like a fool!" he said harshly. "Of course he
means it. And if she's fool enough all my plans, all my pains, all my
rights--and once you come to your senses and help me I shall have my
rights--all, all, all will go for nothing. For nothing!" He sank back
in his chair. "There! now you've excited me. You've excited me, and
you know that I can't bear excitement!" His hand groped feebly for his
glass, and he raised it to his lips. He gasped once or twice. The
color came back to his face.

"I am sorry," Basset said.

"Ay, ay. But be a good lad. Be a good lad. Make up your mind to help
me at the Great House."

Basset shook his head.

"To help me, and twenty-four hours--only twenty-four hours, man--may
make all the difference! All the difference in the world to me."

"I have told you my views about it," Basset said doggedly. He shifted
uneasily in his chair. "I cannot do it, sir, and I won't."

John Audley groaned. "Well, well!" he answered. "I'll say no more now.
I'll say no more now. When you and she have made it up"--in vain
Basset shook his head--"you'll see the question in another light. Ay,
believe me, you will. It'll be your business then, and your interest,
and nothing venture, nothing win! You'll see it differently. You'll
help the old man to his rights then."

Basset shrugged his shoulders, but thought it useless to protest. The
other sighed once or twice and was silent also. At length, "You never
told me that you had heard from her," Basset said.

"That I'd----" John Audley broke off. "What is it, Toft?" he asked
over his shoulder.

A man-servant, tall, thin, lantern-jawed, had entered unseen. "I came
to see if you wanted anything more, sir?" he said.

"Nothing, nothing, Toft. Good-night!" He spoke impatiently, and he
watched the man out before he went on. Then, "Perhaps I heard from
her, perhaps I didn't," he said. "It's some time ago. What of it?"

"She was in great distress when she wrote."

John Audley raised his eyebrows. "What of it!" he repeated.
"She was that woman's daughter. When Peter married a tradesman's
daughter--married a----" He did not continue. His thoughts trickled
away into silence. The matter was not worthy of his attention.

But by and by he roused himself. "You've ridiculous scruples," he
said. "Absurd scruples. But," briskly, "there's that much of good in
this girl that I think she'll put an end to them. You must brighten
up, my lad, and spark it a little! You're too grave."

"Damn!" said Basset. "For God's sake, don't begin it all again. I've
told you that I've not the least intention----"

"She'll see to that if she's what I think her," John Audley retorted
cheerfully. "If she's her mother's daughter! But very well, very well!
We'll change the subject. I've been working at the Feathers--the
Prince's Feathers."

"Have you gone any farther?" Basset asked, forcing an interest which
would have been ready enough at another time.

"I might have, but I had a visitor."

Visitors were rare at the Gatehouse, and Basset wondered. "Who was
it?" he asked.

"Bagenal the maltster from Riddsley. He came about some political
rubbish. Some trouble they are having with Mottisfont. D--n
Mottisfont! What do I care about him? They think he isn't running
straight--that he's going in for corn-law repeal. And Bagenal and the
other fools think that that will be the ruin of the town."

"But Mottisfont is a Tory," Basset objected.

"So is Peel. They are both in Bagenal's bad books. Bagenal is sure
that Peel is going back to the cotton people he came from. Spinning
Jenny spinning round again!"

"I see."

"I asked him," Audley continued, rubbing his knees with sly enjoyment,
"what Stubbs the lawyer was doing about it. He's the party manager.
Why didn't he come to me?"

Basset smiled. "What did he say to that?"

"Hummed and hawed. At last he said that owing to Stubbs's connection
with--you know who--it was thought that he was not the right person to
come to me. So I asked him what Stubbs's employer was going to do
about it."

"Ah!"

"He didn't know what to say to that, the ass! Thought I should go the
other way, you see. So I told him"--John Audley laughed maliciously as
he spoke--"that, for the landed interest, the law had taken away my
land, and, for politics, I would not give a d--n for either party in a
country where men did not get their rights! Lord! how he looked!"

"Well, you didn't hide your feelings."

"Why should I?" John Audley asked cheerfully. "What will they do for
me? Nothing. Will they move a finger to right me? No. Then a plague on
both their houses!" He snapped his fingers in schoolboy fashion and
rose to his feet. He lit a candle, taking a light from the fire with a
spill. "I am going to bed now, Peter. Unless----" he paused, the
candlestick in his hand, and gazed fixedly at his companion. "Lord,
man, what we could do in two or three hours! In two or three hours.
This very night!"

"I've told you that I will have nothing to do with it!" Basset
repeated.

John Audley sighed, and removing his eyes, poked the wick of the
candle with the snuffers. "Well," he said, "good-night. We must look
to bright eyes and red lips to convert you. What a man won't do for
another he will do for himself, Peter. Good-night."

Left alone, Basset stared fretfully at the fire. It was not the first
time by scores that John Audley had tried him and driven him almost
beyond bearing. But habit is a strong tie, and a common taste is a
bond even stronger. In this room, and from the elder man, Basset had
learned to trace a genealogy, to read a coat, to know a bar from a
bend, to discourse of badges and collars under the guidance of the
learned Anstie or the ingenious Le Neve. There he had spent hours
flitting from book to book and chart to chart in the pursuit, as
thrilling while it lasted as any fox-chase, of some family link, the
origin of this, the end of that, a thing of value only to those who
sought it, but to them all-important. He could recall many a day so
spent while rain lashed the tall mullioned windows or sunlight flooded
the window-seat in the bay; and these days had endeared to him every
nook in the library from the folio shelves in the shadowy corner under
the staircase to the cosey table near the hearth which was called "Mr.
Basset's," and enshrined in a long drawer a tree of the Bassets of
Blore.

For he as well as Audley came of an ancient and shrunken stock. He
also could count among his forbears men who had fought at Blore Heath
and Towton, or had escaped by a neck from the ruin of the Gunpowder
Plot. So he had fallen early under the spell of the elder man's
pursuits, and, still young, had learned from him to live in the past.
Later the romantic solitude of the Gatehouse, where he had spent more
of the last six years than in his own house at Blore, had confirmed
him in the habit.

Under the surface, however, the two men remained singularly unlike.
While a fixed idea had narrowed John Audley's vision to the inhuman,
the younger man, under a dry and reserved exterior--he was shy, and
his undrained acres, his twelve hundred a year, poorly supported an
ancient name--was not only human, but in his way was something of an
idealist. He dreamed dreams, he had his secret aspirations, at times
ambition of the higher kind stirred in him, he planned plans and
another life than this. But always--this was a thing inbred in him--he
put forward the commonplace, as the cuttle-fish sheds ink, and hid
nothing so shyly as the visions which he had done nothing to make
real. On those about him he made no deep impression, though from one
border of Staffordshire to the other his birth won respect. Politics
viewed as a game, and a selfish game, had no attraction for him.
Quarter Sessions and the Bench struck no spark from him. At the Races
and the County Ball richer men outshone him. But given something to
touch his heart and fire his ambition, he had qualities. He might
still show himself in another light.

Something of this, for no reason that he could imagine, some feeling
of regret for past opportunities, passed through his mind as he sat
fretting over John Audley's folly. But after a time he roused himself
and became aware that he was tired; and he rose and lit a candle. He
pushed back the smouldering logs and slowly and methodically he put
out the lights. He gave a last thought to John Audley. "There was
always one maggot in his head," he muttered, "now there's a second.
What I would not do to please him, he thinks I shall do to please
another! Well, he does not know her yet!"

He went to bed.




                             CHAPTER VIII

                            THE GATEHOUSE


It is within the bounds of imagination that death may make no greater
change in our inner selves than is wrought at times by a new mood or
another outlook. When Mary, an hour before the world was astir on the
morning after her arrival, let herself out of the Gatehouse, and from
its threshold as from a ledge saw the broad valley of the Trent
stretched before her in all the beauty of a May morning, her alarm of
the past night seemed incredible. At her feet a sharp slope, clothed
in gorse and shrub, fell away to meet the plain. It sank no more than
a couple of hundred feet, but this was enough to enable her to follow
the silver streak of the river winding afar between park and coppice
and under many a church tower. Away to the right she could see the
three graceful spires of Lichfield, and southward, where an opal haze
closed the prospect, she could imagine the fringe of the Black
Country, made beautiful by distance.

In sober fact few parts of England are less inviting than the low
lands of Staffordshire, when the spring floods cover them or the fogs
of autumn cling to the cold soil. But in spring, when larks soar above
them and tall, lop-sided elms outline the fields, they have their
beauty; and Mary gazed long at the fair prospect before she turned her
back on it and looked at the house that was fated to be her home.

It was what its name signified, a gatehouse; yet by turns it could be
a sombre and a charming thing. Some Audley of noble ideas, a man long
dead, had built it to be the entrance to his demesne. The park wall,
overhung by trees, still ran right and left from it, but the road
which had once passed through the archway now slid humbly aside and
entered the park by a field gate. A wide-latticed Tudor tower, rising
two stories above the arch and turreted at the four corners, formed
the middle. It was buttressed on either hand by a lower building,
flush with it and of about the same width. The tower was of yellowish
stone, the wings were faced with stained stucco. Right and left of the
whole a plot of shrubs masked on the one hand the stables, on the
other the kitchens--modern blocks set back to such a distance that
each touched the old part at a corner only.

He who had planned the building had set it cunningly on the brow of
the Great Chase, so that, viewed from the vale, it rose against the
skyline. On dark days it broke the fringe of woodland and stood up,
gloomy and forbidding, the portal of a Doubting Castle. On bright
days, with its hundred diamond panes a-glitter in the sunshine, it
seemed to be the porch of a fairy palace, the silent home of some
Sleeping Beauty. At all times it imposed itself upon men below and
spoke of something beyond, something unseen, greater, mysterious.

To Mary Audley, who saw it at its best, the very stains of the plaster
glorified by the morning light, it was a thing of joy. She fancied
that to live behind those ancient mullioned windows, to look out
morning and evening on that spacious landscape, to feel the bustle of
the world so remote, must in itself be happiness. For a time she could
not turn from it.

But presently the desire to explore her new surroundings seized her
and she re-entered the house. A glance at the groined roof of the
hall--many a gallant horseman had ridden under it in his time--proved
that it was merely the archway closed and fitted with a small door and
window at either end. She unlocked the farther door and passed into a
paved court, in which the grass grew between the worn flags. In the
stables on the left a dog whined. The kitchens were on the other hand,
and before her an opening flanked by tall heraldic beasts broke a low
wall, built of moss-grown brick. She ventured through it and uttered a
cry of delight.

Near at hand, under cover of a vast chestnut tree, were traces of
domestic labor: a grindstone, a saw-pit, a woodpile, coops with
clucking hens. But beyond these the sward, faintly lined at first with
ruts, stretched away into forest glades, bordered here by giant oaks
brown in bud, there by the yellowish-green of beech trees. In the
foreground lay patches of gorse, and in places an ancient thorn, riven
and half prostrate, crowned the russet of last year's bracken with a
splash of cream. Heedless of the spectator, rabbits sat making their
toilet, and from every brake birds filled the air with a riot of song.

To one who had seen little but the streets of Paris, more sordid then
than now, the scene was charming. Mary's eyes filled, her heart
swelled. Ah, what a home was here! She had espied on her journey many
a nook and sheltered dell, but nothing that could vie with this!
Heedless of her thin shoes, with no more than a handkerchief on her
head, she strayed on and on. By and by a track, faintly marked, led
her to the left. A little farther, and old trees fell into line on
either hand, as if in days long gone, before age thinned their ranks,
they had formed an avenue.

For a time she sat musing on a fallen trunk, then the hawthorn that a
few paces away perfumed the spring air moved her to gather an armful
of it. She forgot that time was passing, almost she forgot that she
had not breakfasted, and she might have been nearly a mile from the
Gatehouse when she was startled by a faint hail that seemed to come
from behind her. She looked back and saw Basset coming after her.

He, too, was hatless--he had set off in haste--and he was out of
breath. She turned with concern to meet him. "Am I very late, Mr.
Basset?" she asked, her conscience pricking her. What if this first
morning she had broken the rules?

"Oh no," he said. And then, "You've not been farther than this?"

"No. I am afraid my uncle is waiting?"

"Oh no. He breakfasts in his own room. But Etruria told me that
you had gone this way, and I followed. I see that you are not
empty-handed."

"No." And she thrust the great bunch of may under his nose--who would
not have been gay, who would not have lost her reserve in such a
scene, on such a morning? "Isn't it fresh? Isn't it delicious?"

As he stooped to the flowers his eyes met hers smiling through the
hawthorn sprays, and he saw her as he had not seen her before. Her
gravity had left her. Spring laughed in her eyes, youth fluttered in
the tendrils of her hair, she was the soul of May. And what she had
found of beauty in the woodland, of music in the larks' songs, of
perfume in the blossoms, of freshness in the morning, the man found in
her; and a shock, never to be forgotten, ran through him. He did not
speak. He smelled the hawthorn in silence.

But a few seconds later--as men reckon time--he took note of his
feelings, and he was startled. He had not been prepared to like her,
we know; many things had armed him against her. But before the
witchery of her morning face, the challenge of her laughing eyes, he
awoke to the fact that he was in danger. He had to own that if he must
live beside her day by day and would maintain his indifference, he
must steel himself. He must keep his first impressions of her always
