But the shot had told; no one else spoke.

"That man's wages," the Manchester man continued, "were six shillings
a week--it was in Wiltshire. And you are protected too, sir," he
continued, turning suddenly on the Duke. "Have you made a fortune,
sir, farming?"

"I don't know as I have," the farmer answered sulkily--and in a lower
voice, "Dang his impudence again!"

"Why not? Because you are paying a protected rent. Because you pay
high for feeding-stuff. Because you pay poor-rates so high you'd be
better off paying double wages. There's only one man benefits by the
corn-tax, sir, there's only one who is truly protected, and that is
the landlord!"

But to several in the room this was treason, and they cried out upon
it. "Ay, that's the bottom of it, mister," one roared, "down with the
landlords and up with the cotton lords!" "There's your Reform Bill,"
shouted another, "we've put the beggars on horseback, and none's to
ride but them now!" A third protested that cheap bread was a herring
drawn across the track. "They're for cheap bread for the poor man, but
no votes! Votes would make him as good as them!"

"Anyway," the stranger replied patiently, "it's clear that neither the
farmer nor the laborer grows fat on Protection. Your wages are nine
shillings----"

"Ten and eleven!" cried two or three.

"And your farmers are smothered in rates. If that's all you get by
Protection I'd try another system."

"Anyways, I'll ask you to try it out of my house," Musters said. "I've
a good landlord and I'll not hear him abused!"

"Hear! Hear! Musters! Quite right!"

"I've not said an uncivil word," the Manchester man rejoined. "I shall
leave your house to-morrow, not an hour before. I'll add only one
word, gentlemen. Bread is the staff of life. Isn't it the last thing
you should tax?"

"True," Mr. Pepper replied. "But isn't agriculture the staple
industry? Isn't it the base on which all other industries stand? Isn't
it the mainstay of the best constitution in the world? And wasn't it
the land that steadied England, and kept it clear of Bonaparte and
Wooden Shoes----"

"Ay, wooden ships against wooden shoes for ever!" broke in old
Hayward, in great excitement. "Where were the oaks grown as beat Bony!
No, master, protect the oak and protect the wheat, and England'll
never lack ships nor meat! Your cotton-printers and ironfounders
they're great folks now, great folks, with their brass and their
votes, and so they've a mind to upset the gentry. It's the town
against the country, and new money against the old acres that have fed
us and our fathers before us world without end! But put one of my lads
in your mills, and amid your muck, and in twelve months he'd not pitch
hay, no not three hours of the day!"

Basset could hear the free trader's chair grate on the sanded floor as
he pushed it back. "Well, gentlemen," he said, "I'll not quarrel with
you. I wish you all the protection you deserve--and I think Sir Robert
will give it you! For us, I'm not saying that we are not thinking of
our own interests."

"Devil a doubt of that!" muttered the farmer.

"And some of us may have been cold-shouldered by my lord. But you
may take it from me that there's some of us, too, are as anxious to
better the poor man's lot--ay, as Lord Ashley himself! That's all!
Good-night, gentlemen."

When he was gone, "Gi' me a coal for my pipe, John," said the Duke. "I
never heard the like of that in Riddsley. He's a gallus glib chap
that!"

"I won't say," said Mr. Pepper cautiously, "that there's nothing in
it."

"Plenty in it for the cotton people and the coal people, and the
potters. But not for us!"

"But if Sir Robert sees it that way?" queried the surgeon, delicately.

"Then if Sir Robert were member for Riddsley," Hayward answered
stubbornly, "he'd get his notice to quit, Dr. Pepper! You may bet your
hat on that!"

"There's one got a lesson last night," a new-comer chimed in. "Parson
Colet got so beaten on the moor he's in bed I am told. He's been
speaking free these last two months, and I thought he'd get it. Three
lads from your part I am told, Hayward."

"Well, well!" the farmer replied with philosophy. "There's good in
Colet, and maybe it'll be a lesson to him! Anyway, good or bad, he's
going."

"Going?" cried two or three, speaking at once.

"I met Rector not two hours back. He'd a letter from Colet saying he
was going to preach the same rubbish here as he's fed 'em with at
Brown Heath--cheap bread and the rest of it. Rector's been to him--he
wouldn't budge, and he got his notice to quit right straight. Rector
was fit to burst when I saw him."

"Colet be a born fool!" cried Musters. "Who's like to employ him after
that? Wheat is tithe and the parsons are as fond of their tithe as any
man. You may look a long way before you'll find a parson that's a
repealer."

"Serves Colet right!" said one. "But I'm sorry for him all the same.
There's worse men than the Reverend Colet."

Basset could never say afterwards what moved him at this point, but
whatever it was he got up and went out. The boots was lounging at the
door of the inn. He asked the man where Mr. Colet lodged, and learning
that it was in Stream Street, near the Maypole, he turned that way.




                              CHAPTER XV

                          STRANGE BEDFELLOWS


Had any one told Basset, even that morning, that before night he would
seek the advice of the Riddsley curate, he would have met the
suggestion with unmeasured scorn. Probably he had not since his
college days spent an hour in intimate talk with a man so far from him
in fortune and position, and so unlike him in those things which bring
men together. Nor in the act of approaching Colet--under the impulse
of a few casual words and a sudden thought--was he able to understand
or to justify himself.

But when he rose to his feet after an hour spent beside the curate's
dingy hearth--over the barber's shop in Stream Street--he did not need
to justify the step. He had said little but he had heard much. Colet's
tongue had been loosened by the sacrifice he had made, and inspired by
that love of his kind which takes refuge in the most unlikely shapes,
he had poured forth at length his beliefs and his aspirations. And
Basset, whose world had tottered since morning, for whom common things
had lost their poise and life its wonted aspect, began to think that
he had found in the other's aims a new standpoint and the offer of a
new beginning.

The dip candles, which had been many times snuffed, were burning low
when the two rose. The curate, whose pale cheeks matched his bandaged
head, had a last word to say. "Of the need I am sure," he repeated, as
Basset's eye sought the cheap clock on the mantelpiece. "If I have not
proved that, the fault, sir, is mine. But the means--they are a
question for you; almost any man may see them more clearly than I do.
By votes, it may be, and so through the people working out their own
betterment. Or by social measures, as Lord Ashley thinks, through the
classes that are fitted by education to judge for all. Or by the wider
spread, as I hold, of self-sacrifice by all for all--to me, the ideal.
But of one thing I am convinced; that this tax upon the commonest
food, which takes so much more in proportion from the poor than from
the rich, is wrong. Certainly wrong, Mr. Basset,--unless the gain and
the loss can be equally spread. That's another matter."

"I will not say any more now," Basset answered cautiously, "than that
I am inclined to your view. But for yourself, are there not others who
will not pay so dearly for maintaining it?"

A redness spread over the curate's long horse-face. "No, Mr. Basset,"
he rejoined, "if I left my duty to others I should pay still more
dearly. I am my own man. I will remain so."

"But what will you do when you leave here?" Basset inquired, casting
his eyes round the shabby room. He did not see it as he had seen it on
his entrance. He discerned that, small as it was, and shabby as it
was, it might be a man's home. "I fear that there are few incumbents
who hold your views."

"There are absentees," Colet replied with a smile, "who are not so
particular; and in the north there are a few who think as I think. I
shall not starve."

"I have an old house on the Derbyshire border twenty miles from here,"
Basset said. "A servant and his wife keep it, and during some months
of the year I live there. It is an out-of-the-way place, Mr. Colet,
but it is at your service--if you don't get work?"

The curate seemed to shrink into himself. "I couldn't trespass on
you," he said.

"I hope you will," Basset replied. "In the meantime, who was the man
you quoted a few minutes ago?"

"Francis Place. He is a good man though not as we"--he touched his
threadbare cloth--"count goodness. He is something of a Socialist,
something of a Chartist--he might frighten you, Mr. Basset. But he has
the love of the people in him."

"I will see him."

"He has been a tailor."

That hit Basset fairly in the face. "Good heavens!" he said. "A
tailor?"

"Yes," Colet replied, smiling. "But a very uncommon tailor. Let me
tell you why I quoted him. Because, though he is not a Christian, he
has ideals. He aims higher than he can shoot, while the aims of the
Manchester League, though I agree with them upon the corn-tax, seem to
me to be bounded by the material and warped by their own interests."

Basset nodded. "You have thought a good deal on these things," he
said.

"I live among the poor. I have them always before me."

"And I have thought so little that I need time. You must think no
worse of me if I wait a while. And now, good-night."

But the other did not take the hand held out to him. He was staring at
the candle. "I am not clear that I have been quite frank with you," he
said awkwardly. "You have offered me the shelter of your house though
I am a stranger, Mr. Basset, and though you must suspect that to
harbor me may expose you to remark. Well, I may be tempted to avail
myself of your kindness. But I cannot do so unless you know more of my
circumstances."

"I know all that is necessary."

"You don't know what I am going to tell you," Colet persisted. "And I
think that you should. I am going to marry the daughter of your
uncle's servant, Toft."

"Good Lord!" cried Basset. This was a second and more serious blow. It
brought him down from the clouds.

"That shocks you, Mr. Basset," the curate continued with dignity,
"that I should marry one in her position? Well, I am not called upon
to justify it. Why I think her worthy, and more than worthy to share
my life, is my business. I only trouble you with the matter because
you have made me an offer which you might not have made had you known
this."

Basset did not deny the fact. He could not, indeed. His taste, his
prejudice, his traditions all had received a blow, all were up in
arms; and, for the moment, at any rate he repented of his visit. He
felt that in stepping out of the normal round he had made a mistake.
He should have foreseen, he should have known that he would meet with
such shocks. "You have certainly astonished me," he said after a pause
of dismay. "I cannot think the match suitable, Mr. Colet. May I ask if
my uncle knows of this?"

"Miss Audley knows of it."

"But--you cannot yourself think it suitable!"

"I have," Colet replied dryly, "or rather I had seventy pounds a year.
What girl, born in comfort, gently bred, sheltered from childhood
could I ask to share that? How could I, with so little in the present
and no prospects, ask a gentlewoman to share my lot?"

Basset did not reply, but he was not convinced. A clergyman to marry a
servant, good and refined as Etruria was! It seemed to him to be
unseemly, to be altogether wrong.

Colet too was silent a moment. Then, "I am glad I have told you this,"
he said. "I shall not now trespass on you. On the other hand, I hope
that you may still do something--and with your name, you can do
much--for the good cause. If rumor goes for anything, many will in the
next few months examine the ground on which they stand. It will be
much, if what I have said has weight with you."

He spoke with constraint, but he spoke like a man, and Basset owned
his equality while he resented it. He felt that he ought to renew his
offer of hospitality, but he could not--reserve and shyness had him
again in their grip. He muttered something about thinking it over,
added a word or two of thanks--which were cut short by the flickering
out of the candle--and a minute later he was in the dark deserted
street, and walking back to his inn--not over well content with
himself, if the truth be told.

Either he should not have gone, he felt, or he should have gone the
whole way, sunk his ideas of caste, and carried the thing through.
What was it to him if the man was going to marry a servant?

But that was a detail. The main point was that he should not have
gone. It had been a foolish impulse--he saw it now--which had taken
him to the barber's shop; and one which he might have known that he
would repent. He ought to have foreseen that he could not place
himself on Colet's level without coming into collision with him; that
he could not draw wisdom from him without paying toll.

An impossible person, he thought, a man of ideas quite unlike his own!
And yet the man had spoken well and ably, and spoken from experience.
He had told the things that he had seen as he passed from house to
house, hard, sad facts, the outcome of rising numbers and falling
wages, of over-production, of mouths foodless and unwanted. And all
made worse, as he maintained, by this tax on bread, that barely
touched the rich man's income, yet took a heavy toll from the small
wage.

As he recalled some of the things that he had heard, Basset felt his
interest revive. Colet had dealt with facts; he had attempted no
oratory, he had cast no glamour over them. But he had brought to bear
upon them the light of an ideal--the Christian ideal of unselfishness;
and his hearer, while he doubted, while he did not admit that the
solution was practical, owned its beauty.

For he too, as we know, had had his aspirations, though he had rarely
thought of turning them into action. Instead, he had hidden them
behind the commonplace; and in this he had matched the times, which
were commonplace. For the country lay in the trough of the wave.
Neither the fine fury of the generation which had adored the rights of
man, nor the splendid endurance which the great war had fostered, nor
the lesser ardors of the Reform era, which found its single panacea in
votes, touched or ennobled it. Great wealth and great poverty,
jostling one another, marked a material age, seeking remedies in
material things, despising arms, decrying enthusiasm; an age which
felt, but hardly bowed as yet, to the breath of the new spirit.

But Basset--perhaps because the present offered no great prospect to
the straitened squire--had had his glimpses of a life higher and
finer, devoted to something above the passing whim and the day's
indulgence, a life that should not be useless to those who came after
him. Was it possible that he now heard the call? Could this be the
crusade of which he had idly dreamed? Had the trumpet sounded at the
moment of his utmost need?

If only it were so! During the evening he had kept his sorrow at bay
as well as he could, distracting his thoughts with passing objects.
Now, as the boots ushered him up the close-smelling stairs to the
inn's best room, and he stood in his hat and coat, looking on the cold
bare aspect and the unfamiliar things--he owned himself desolate. The
thought of Mary, of his hopes and plans and of the end of these,
returned upon him in an irresistible flood. The waters which he had
stemmed all day, though all day they had lapped his lips, overwhelmed
him with their bitterness. Mary! He had loved her and she--he knew
what she thought of him.

He could not take up the old life. She had made an end of that, the
rather as from this time onward the Gatehouse would be closed to him
by her presence. And the old house near Wootton where he had been wont
to pass part of his time? That hardly met his needs or his
aspirations. Unhappy as he was, he could not see himself sitting down
in idleness, to brood and to rust in a home so remote, so quiet, so
lost among the stony hills that the country said of it,


                    "Wootton under Weaver
                     Where God came never!"


No, he could hardly face that. Hitherto he had not been called upon to
say what he would do with his life. Now the question was put to him
and he had to answer it. He had to answer it. For many minutes he sat
on the bed staring before him. And from time to time he sighed.




                             CHAPTER XVI

                    THE GREAT HOUSE AT BEAUDELAYS


It was about a week after this that two men stood on the neglected
lawn, contemplating the long blind front of Beaudelays House. With all
its grandeur the house lacked the dignity of ruin, for ruin presumes a
past, and the larger part of the Great House had no past. The ancient
wing that had welcomed brides, and echoed the laughter of children and
given back the sullen notes of the passing-bell did not suffice to
redeem the whole. By night the house might pass; the silent bulk
imposed on the eye. By day it required no effort of fancy to see the
scaffold still clinging to the brickwork, or to discern that the grand
entrance had never opened to guest or neighbor, that everyday life had
never gazed through the blank windows of the long façade.

The house, indeed, was not only dead. It had never lived.

Certainly Nature had done something to shroud the dead. The lawn was
knee-deep in weeds, and the evergreens about it had pushed out
embracing arms to narrow the vista before the windows. At the lower
end of the lawn a paved terrace, the width of the house, promised a
freer air, but even here grass sprouted between the flags, and elders
labored to uproot the stately balustrade that looked on the lower
garden. This garden, once formal, was now a tangle of vegetation, a
wilderness amid whose broad walks Venuses slowly turned to Dryads, and
classic urns lay in fragments, split by the frosts of some excessive
winter. Only the prospect of the Trent Valley and the Derbyshire
foot-hills, visible beyond the pleasance, still pleased; and this view
was vague and sad and distant. For the Great House, as became its
greatness, shunned the public eye, and, lying far back, set a wide
stretch of park between its bounds and the verge of the upland.

One of the two men was the owner. The other who bore a bunch of keys
was Stubbs. Both had a depressed air. It would have been hard to say
which of the two entered more deeply into the sadness of the place.

Presently my lord turned his back on the house. "The view is fine," he
said. "The only fine thing about the place," he added bitterly. "Isn't
there a sort of Belvedere below the garden?"

"There is, my lord. But I fear that it is out of repair."

"Like everything else! There, don't think I'm blaming you for it, man.
You cannot make bricks without straw. But let us look at this
Belvedere."

They descended the steps, and passed slowly along the grass-grown
walk, now and again stepping aside to avoid the clutch of a straggling
rose bough, or the fragments of a broken pillar. They paused to
inspect the sundial, a giant Butterfly with closed wings, a replica of
the stone monster in the Yew Walk. Lord Audley read the inscription,
barely visible through the verdigris that stained the dial-plate:


                        "Non sine sole volo!"


"Just so!" he said. "A short life and a merry one!"

A few paces farther along the walk they stopped to examine the basin
of the great fountain. Cracked from edge to centre, and become a
shallow bed of clay and weeds, it was now as unsightly as it had been
beautiful in the days when fair women leaning over it had fed the gold
fish, or viewed their mirrored faces in its waters.

"The fortunes of the Audleys in a nutshell!" muttered the unlucky
owner. And turning on his heel, "Confound it, Stubbs," he cried, "I
have had as much of this as I can stand! A little more and I shall go
back and cut my throat! It is beginning to rain, too. D--n the
Belvedere! Let us go into the house. That cannot be as bad as this."

Without waiting for an answer, or looking behind him, he strode back
the way they had come. Stubbs followed in silence, and they regained
the lawn.

"I tell you what it is," Audley continued, letting the agent come
abreast of him. "You must find some vulgarian to take the place--iron
man or cotton man, I don't care who he is, if he has got the cash I
You must let it, Stubbs. You must let it! It's a white elephant, it's
the d--ndest White Elephant man ever had!"

The lawyer shook his head. "You may be sure, my lord," he said mildly,
"I should have advised that long ago, if it were possible. But we
couldn't let it in its present state--for a short term; and we have no
more power to lease it for a long one than, as your lordship knows, we
have power to sell it."

The other swore. At the outset he had scarcely felt his poverty. But
he was beginning to feel it. There were moments such as this when his
withers were wrung; when the consequence which the title had brought
failed to soften the hardships of his lot--a poor peer with a vast
house. Had he tried to keep the Great House in repair it would have
swallowed the whole income of the peerage--a sum which, as it was,
barely sufficed for his needs as a bachelor.

Already Stubbs had hinted that there was one way out--a rich marriage.
And Audley had received the hint with the easiness of a man who was in
no haste to marry and might, likely enough, marry where money was. But
once or twice during the last few days, which they had been spending
in a review of the property, my lord had shown irritation. When an old
farmer had said to his face, that he must bring home a bride with a
good fat chest, "and his lordship would be what his forbears had
been," the great man, in place of a laughing answer, had turned glumly
away.

Presently the two halted at the door of the north wing. Stubbs
unlocked it and pushed it open. They entered an ante-room of moderate
size.

"Faugh!" Audley cried. "Open a window! Break one if necessary."

Stubbs succeeded in opening one, and they passed on into the great
hall, a room sixty feet long and open to the roof, a gallery running
round it. A withdrawing-room of half the length opened at one end, and
midway along the inner side a short passage led to a second hall--the
servants' hall--the twin of this. Together they formed an H, and were
probably a Jacobean copy of a Henry the Eighth building. A long table,
some benches, and a score of massive chairs furnished the room.
Between the windows hung a few ragged pictures, and on either side of
the farther door a piece of tapestry hung askew.

Audley looked about him. In this room eighty years before the old lord
had held his revels. The two hearths had glowed with logs, a hundred
wax-lights had shone on silver and glass and the rosy tints of old
wine. Guests in satin and velvet, henchmen and led captains, had
filled it with laughter and jest, and song. With a foot on the table
they had toasted the young king--not stout Farmer George, not the old,
mad monarch, but the gay young sovereign. To-day desolation reigned.
The windows gray with dirt let in a grisly light. All was bare and
cold and rusty--the webs of spiders crossed the very hearths. The old
lord, mouldering in his coffin, was not more unlike that Georgian
reveller than was the room of to-day unlike the room of eighty years
before.

Perhaps the thought struck his descendant. "God! What a
charnel-house!" he cried. "To think that men made merry in this room.
It's a vault, it's a grave! Let us get away from it. What's through,
man?"

They passed into the withdrawing-room, where panels of needlework of
Queen Anne's time, gloomy with age, filled the wall spaces, and a few
pieces of furniture crouched under shrouds of dust. As they stood
gazing two rats leapt from a screen of Cordovan leather that lay in
tatters on the floor. The rats paused an instant to stare at the
intruders, then fled in panic.

The younger man advanced to one of the panels in the wall. "A hunting
scene?" he said. "These may be worth money some day."

The lawyer looked doubtful. "It will be a long day first, I am
afraid," he said. "It's funereal stuff at the best, my lord."

"At any rate it is out of reach of the rats," Lord Audley answered. He
cast a look of distaste at the shreds of the screen. He touched them
with his foot. A third rat sprang out and fled squeaking to covert.
"Oh, d--n!" he said. "Let us see something else."

The lawyer led the way upstairs to the ghostly, echoing gallery that
ran round the hall. They glanced into the principal guest-room, which
was over the drawing-room. Then they went by the short passage of the
H to the range of bedrooms over the servants' hall. For the most part
they opened one from the other.

"The parents slept in the outer and the young ladies in the inner,"
Audley said, smiling. "Gad! it tells a tale of the times!"

Stubbs opened the nearest door and recoiled. "Take care, my lord!" he
said. "Here are the bats!"

"Faugh! What a smell! Can't you keep them out?"

"We tried years ago--I hate them like poison--but it was of no use.
They are in all these upper rooms."

They were. For when Stubbs, humping his shoulders as under a shower,
opened a second door, the bats streamed forth in a long silent
procession, only to stream back again as silently. In a dusky corner
of the second room a cluster, like a huge bunch of grapes, hung to one
of the rafters. Now and again a bat detached itself and joined the
living current that swept without a sound through the shadowy rooms.

"There's nothing beyond these rooms?"

"No."

"Then let us go down. Rats and bats and rottenness! _Non sine sole
volo!_ We may not, but the bats do. Let us go down! Or no! I was
forgetting. Where is the Muniment Room?"

"This way, my lord," Stubbs replied, turning with suspicious
readiness--the bats were his pet aversion. "I brought a candle and
some of the new lucifers. This way, my lord."

He led the way down to a door set in a corner of the ante-room. He
unlocked this and they found themselves at the foot of a circular
staircase. On the farther side of the stairfoot was another door which
led, Stubbs explained, into the servants' quarters. "This turret," he
added, "is older even than the wing, and forms no part of the H. It
was retained because it supplied a second staircase, and also a short
cut from the servants' hall to the entrance. The Muniment Room is over
this lobby on the first floor. Allow me to go first, my lord."

The air was close, but not unpleasant, and the stairs were clean. On
the first floor a low-browed door, clamped and studded with iron,
showed itself. Stubbs halted before it. There was a sputter. A light
shone out. "Wonderful invention!" he said. "Electric telegraph not
more wonderful, though marvellous invention that, my lord."

"Yes," the other answered dryly. "But--when were you here last,
Stubbs?"

"Not for a twelvemonth, my lord."

"Leave your candle?"

"No."

"Then what's that?" The young man pointed to something that lay in the
angle between a stair and the wall.

"God bless my soul!" the lawyer cried. "It's a candle."

"And clean. It has not been there a week. Who has been here, my
friend?"

Stubbs reflected. "No one with my authority," he said. "But if the
devil himself has been here," he continued, stoutly recovering
himself, "he can have done no harm. I can prove that in five minutes,
my lord--if you will kindly hold the light." He inserted a large key
in the lock, and with an effort, he shot back the bolts. He pushed
open the door and signed to Lord Audley to enter.

He did so, and Stubbs followed. They stood and looked about them. They
were in a whitewashed chamber twelve feet square, clean, bare, empty.
The walls gave back the light so that the one candle lit the place
perfectly.

"It's as good as air-tight," Stubbs said with pride. "And you see, my
lord, we swept it as bare as the palm of my hand. I can answer for it
that not a shred of paper or a piece of wax was left."

Audley, gazing about him, seemed satisfied. His face relaxed. "Yes,"
he said, "you could not overlook anything in a place like this. I'm
glad I've seen it."

He was turning to go when a thought struck him. He lowered the light
and scanned the floor. "All the same, somebody has been here!" he
exclaimed. "There's one of the things you are so pleased with--a
lucifer!"

Stubbs stooped and looked. "A lucifer?" he repeated. He picked up the
bit of charred wood and examined it. "Now how did that come here? I
never used one till six months ago."

My lord frowned. "Who is it?" he asked.

"Some one, I fear, who has had a key made," the agent answered,
shaking his head,

"I can see that for myself. But has he learned anything?"

Stubbs stared. "There's nothing to learn, my lord," he said. "You can
see that. Whoever he is, he has cracked the nut and found no kernel!"

The young man looked round him again. He nodded. "I suppose so," he
said. But he seemed ill at ease and inclined to find fault. He threw
the light of the candle this way and that, as if he expected the clean
white walls to tell a tale. "What's that?" he asked suddenly. "A
crack? Or what?"

Stubbs looked, passed his hand over the mark on the wall, effaced it.
"No, my lord, a cobweb," he said. "Nothing."

There was no more to be seen, yet Audley seemed loth to go. At length
he turned and went out. Stubbs closed and locked the door behind them,
then he took the candle from his lordship and invited him to go down
before him. Still the young man hesitated. "I suppose we can learn
nothing more?" he said.

"Nothing, my lord," Stubbs answered. "To tell you the truth, I have
long thought Mr. John mad, and it is possible that his madness has
taken this turn. But I am equally sure that there is nothing for him
to discover, if he spends every day of his life here."

"All the same I don't like it," the owner objected. "Whoever has been
here has no right here. It is odd that I had some notion of this
before we came. You may depend upon it that this was why he fixed
himself at the Gatehouse."

"He may have had something of the sort in his mind," Stubbs admitted.
"But I don't think so, my lord. More probably, being here and idle, he
took to wandering in for lack of something to do."

"And by and by, had a key made and strayed into the Muniment Room! No,
that won't do, Stubbs. And frankly there should be closer supervision
here. It should not have remained for me to discover this."

He began to descend, leaving Stubbs to digest the remark; who for his
part thought honestly that too much was being made of the matter.
Probably the intruder was John Audley; the man had a bee in his
bonnet, and what more likely than that he should be taken with a craze
to haunt the house which he believed was his own? But the agent was
too prudent to defend himself while the young man's vexation was
fresh. He followed him down in silence, and before many minutes had
passed, they were in the open air, and had locked the door behind
them.

Clouds hung low on the tops of the trees, mist veiled the view, and a
small rain was falling on the wet lawn. Nevertheless the young man
moved into the open. "Come this way," he said.

The lawyer turned up the collar of his coat and followed him
unwillingly. "Where does he get in?" my lord asked. It seemed as if
the longer he dwelt on the matter the less he liked it. "Not by that
door--the lock is rusty. The key had shrieked in it. Probably he
enters by one of the windows in the new part."

He walked towards the middle of the lawn and Stubbs, thankful that he
wore Wellington boots, followed him.

The lawyer thought that he had never seen the house wear so dreary an
aspect as it wore under the gray weeping sky. But his lordship was
more practical. "These windows look the most likely," he said after a
short survey: and he dragged his unwilling attendant to the point he
had marked.

A nearer view strengthened his suspicions. On the sill of one of the
windows were scratches and stains. "You see?" he said. "It should not
have been left to me to discover this! Probably John Audley comes from
the Gatehouse by the Yew Walk." He turned to measure the distance with
his eye, the distance which divided the spot from the Iron Gate.
"That's it," he said, "he comes----"

Then, "Good G--d!" he muttered. "Look! Look!" Stubbs looked. They both
looked. Beyond the lawn, on the farther side of the iron grille and
clinging to it with both hands, a man stood bareheaded under the rain.
Whether he had come uncovered, or his hat had been jerked from him by
some movement caused by their appearance, they could not tell; nor how
long he had stood thus, gazing at them through the bars. But they
could see that his eyes never wavered, that his hands gripped the
iron, and the two knew by instinct that in the intensity of his hate,
the man was insensible alike to the rain that drenched him, and to the
wind that blew out the skirts of his thin black coat.

Even Stubbs held his breath. Even he felt that there was something
uncanny and ominous in the appearance. For the gazer was John Audley.




                             CHAPTER XVII

                            TO THE RESCUE


Stubbs was the first to collect himself, but a minute elapsed before
he spoke. Then, "He must be mad," he cried, "mad, to expose himself to
the weather at his age. If I had not seen it, I couldn't believe it!"

"I suppose it is John Audley?"

"Yes." Then raising his voice, "My lord! I don't think I would go to
him now!"

But Audley was already striding across the lawn towards the gate. The
lawyer hesitated, gave way, and followed him.

They were within twenty paces of the silent watcher when he moved--up
to that time he might have been a lay figure. He shook one hand in the
air, as if he would beat them off, then he turned and walked stiffly
away. Half a dozen steps took him out of sight. The Yew Walk swallowed
him.

But, quickly as he vanished, the lawyer had had time to see that he
staggered. "I fear, my lord, he is ill," he said. "He will never reach
the Gatehouse in that state. I had better follow him."

"Why the devil did he come here?" Audley retorted savagely. The
watcher's strange aspect, his face, white against the dark yews, his
stillness, his gesture, a something ominous in all, had shaken him.
"If he had stopped at home----"

"Still----"

"D--n him, it's his affair!"

"Still we cannot leave him if he has fallen, my lord," Stubbs replied
with decision. And without waiting for his employer's assent he tried
the gate. It was locked, but in a trice he found the key on his bunch,
turned it, and pushed back the gate. Audley noticed that it moved
silently on its hinges.

Stubbs, the gate open, began to feel ashamed of his impulse. Probably
there was nothing amiss after all. But he had hardly looked along the
path before he uttered a cry, and hurrying forward, stooped over a
bundle of clothes that lay in the middle of the walk. It was John
Audley. Apparently he had tripped over a root and lain where he had
fallen.

Stubbs's cry summoned the other, who followed him through the gate, to
find him on his knees supporting the old man's head. The sight
recalled Audley to his better self. The mottled face, the staring
eyes, the helpless limbs shocked him. "Good G--d!" he cried, "you were
right, Stubbs! He might have died if we had left him."

"He would have died," Stubbs answered. "As it is--I am not sure." He
opened the waistcoat, felt for the beating of the heart, bent his ear
to it. "No, I don't think he's gone," he said, "but the heart is
feeble, very feeble. We must have brandy! My lord, you are the more
active. Will you go to the Gatehouse--there is no nearer place--and
get some? And something to carry him home! A hurdle if there is
nothing better, and a couple of men?"

"Right!" Audley cried.

"And don't lose a minute, my lord! He's nearly gone."

Audley stripped off his overcoat. "Wrap this about him!" he said. And
before the other could answer he had started for the Gatehouse, at a
pace which he believed that he could keep up.

Pad, pad, my lord ran under the yew trees, swish, swish across the
soaking grass, about the great Butterfly. Pad, pad, again through the
gloom under the yews! Not too fast, he told himself--he was a big man
and he must save himself. Now he saw before him the opening into the
park, and the light falling on the pale turf. And then, at a point not
more than twenty yards short of the open ground, he tripped over a
root, tried to recover himself, struck another root, and fell.

The fall shook him, but he was young, and he was quickly on his feet.
He paused an instant to brush the dirt from his hands and knees; and
it was during that instant that his inbred fear of John Audley, and
the certainty that if John Audley died he need fear no more, rose
before him.

Yes, if he died--this man who was even now plotting against him--there
was an end of that fear! There was an end of uneasiness, of anxiety,
of the alarm that assailed him in the small hours, of the forebodings
that showed him stripped of title and income and consequence. Stripped
of all!

Five seconds passed, and he still stood, engaged with his hands. Five
more; it was his knees he was brushing now--and very carefully.
Another five--the sweat broke out on his brow though the day was cold.
Twenty seconds, twenty-five! His face showed white in the gloom. And
still he stood. He glanced behind him. No one could see him.

But the movement discovered the man to himself, and with an oath he
broke away. He thrust the damning thought from him, he sprang forward.
He ran. In ten strides he was in the open park, and trotting steadily,
his elbows to his sides, across the sward. The blessed light was about
him, the wind swept past his ears, the cleansing rain whipped his
face. Thank God, he had left behind him the heavy air and noisome
scent of the yews. He hated them. He would cut them all down some day.

For in a strange way he associated them with the temptation which had
assailed him. And he was thankful, most thankful, that he had put that
temptation from him--had put it from him, when most men, he thought,
would have succumbed to it. Thank God, he had not! The farther he
went, indeed, the better he felt. By the time he saw the Gatehouse
before him, he was sure that few men, exposed to that temptation,
would have overcome it. For if John Audley died what a relief it would
be! And he had looked very ill; he had looked like a man at the point
of death. The brandy could not reach him under--well, under half an
hour. Half an hour was a long time, when a man looked like that. "I'll
do my best," he thought. "Then if he dies, well and good. I've always
been afraid of him."

He did not spare himself, but he was not in training, and he was well
winded when he reached the Gatehouse. A last effort carried him
between the Butterflies, and he halted on the flags of the courtyard.
A woman, whose skirts were visible, but whose head and shoulders were
hidden by an umbrella, was standing in the doorway on his left,
speaking to some one in the house. She heard his footsteps and turned.

"Lord Audley!" she exclaimed--for it was Mary Audley. Then with a
woman's quickness, "You have come from my uncle?" she cried. "Is he
ill?"

Audley nodded. "I am come for some brandy," he gasped.

She did not waste a moment. She sped into the house, and to the
dining-room. "I had missed him," she cried over her shoulder. "The
man-servant is away. I hoped he might be with him."

In a trice she had opened a cellarette and taken from it a decanter of
brandy. Then she saw that he could not carry this at any speed, and
she turned to the sideboard and took a wicker flask from a drawer.
With a steady hand and without the loss of a minute--he found her
presence of mind admirable--she filled this.

As she corked it, Mrs. Toft appeared, wiping her hands on her apron.
"Dear, dear, miss," she said, "is the master bad? But it's no wonder
when he, that doesn't quit the fire for a week together, goes out like
this? And Toft away and all!" She stared at his lordship. Probably she
knew him by sight.

"Will you get his bed warmed, Mrs. Toft," Mary answered. She gave Lord
Audley the flask. "Please don't lose a moment," she urged. "I am
following--oh yes, I am. But you will go faster."

She had not a thought, he saw, for the disorder of her dress, or for
her hair dishevelled by the wind, and scarce a thought for him. He
decided that he had never seen her to such advantage, but it was no
time for compliments, nor was she in the mood for them. Without more
he nodded and set off on his return journey--he had not been in the
house three minutes. By and by he looked back, and saw that Mary was
following on his heels. She had snatched up a sun-bonnet, discarded
the umbrella, and, heedless of the rain, was coming after him as
swiftly and lightly as Atalanta of the golden apple. "Gad, she's not
one of the fainting sort!" he reflected; and also that if he had given
way to that d--d temptation he could not have looked her in the face.
"As it is," his mind ran, "what are the odds the old boy's not dead
when we get there? If he is--I am safe! If he is not, I might do worse
than think of her. It would checkmate him finely. More"--he looked
again over his shoulder--"she's a fine mover, by Gad, and her figure's
perfect! Even that rag on her head don't spoil her!" Whereupon he
thought of a certain Lady Adela with whom he was very friendly, who
had political connections and would some day have a plum. The
comparison was not, in the matter of fineness and figure, to Lady
Adela's advantage. Her lines were rather on the Flemish side.

Meanwhile Mary was feeling anything but an Atalanta. Wind and rain and
wet grass, loosened hair and swaying skirts do not make for romance.
But in her anxiety she gave small thought to these. Her one instinct
was to help. With all his oddity her uncle had been kind to her, and
she longed to show him that she was grateful. And he was her one
relative. She had no one else in the world. He had given her what of
home he had, and ease, and a security which she had never known
before. Were she to lose him now--the mere fancy spurred her to fresh
exertions, and in spite of a pain in her side, in spite of clinging
skirts, and shoes that threatened to leave her feet, she pushed on.
She was not far behind Audley when he reached the Yew Walk.

She saw him plunge into it, she followed, and was on the scene not
many seconds later. When she caught sight of the little group kneeling
about the prostrate man, that sense of tragedy, and of the inevitable,
which assails at such a time, shook her. The thing always possible,
never expected, had happened at last.

Then the coolness which women find in these emergencies returned. She
knelt between the men, took the insensible head on her arm, held out
her other hand for the cup. "Has he swallowed any?" she asked, taking
command of the situation.

"No," Toft answered--and she became aware that the man with Lord
Audley was the servant.

She waited for no more, she tilted the cup, and by some knack she
succeeded where Toft had failed. A little of the spirit was swallowed.
She improvised a pillow and laid the head down on it. "The lower the
better," she murmured. She felt the hands and began to rub one. "Rub
the other," she said to Toft. "The first thing to do is to get him
home! Have you a carriage? How near can you bring it, Lord Audley?"

"We can bring it to the park at the end of the walk," he answered. "My
agent has gone to fetch it."

"Will you hasten it?" she replied. "Toft will stay with me. And bring
something, please, on which you can carry him to it."

"At once," Audley answered, and he went off in the direction of the
Great House.

"I've seen him as bad before, Miss," Toft said. "I found that he had
gone out without his hat and I followed him, but I could not trace him
at once. I don't think you need feel alarmed."

Certainly the face had lost its mottled look, the eyes were now shut,
the limbs lay more naturally. "If he were only at home!" Mary
answered. "But every moment he is exposed to the cold is against him.
He must be wet through."

She induced the patient to swallow another mouthful of brandy, and
with their eyes on his face the two watched for the first gleam of
consciousness. It came suddenly. John Audley's eyes opened. He stared
at them.

His mind, however, still wandered. "I knew it!" he muttered. "They
could not be there and I not know it! But the wall! The wall is
thick--thick and----" He was silent again.

The rambling mind is to those who are not wont to deal with it a most
uncanny thing, and Mary looked at Toft to see what he made of it. But
the servant had eyes only for his master. He was gazing at him with an
absorbed face.

"Ay, a thick wall!" the sick man murmured. "They may look and look,
they'll not see through it." He was silent a moment, then, "All bare!"
he murmured. "All bare!" He chuckled faintly, and tried to raise
himself, but sank back. "Fools!" he whispered, "fools, when in ten
minutes if they took out a brick----"

The servant cut him short. "Here's his lordship!" he cried. He spoke
so sharply that Mary looked up in surprise, wondering what was amiss.
Lord Audley was within three or four paces of them--the carpet of yew
leaves had deadened his footsteps. "Here's his lordship, sir!" Toft
repeated in the same tone, his mouth close to John Audley's ear.

The servant's manner shocked Mary. "Hush, Toft!" she said. "Do you
want to startle him?"

"His lordship will startle him," Toft retorted. He looked over his
shoulder, and without ceremony he signed to Lord Audley to stand back.

"Bare, quite bare!" John Audley muttered, his mind still far away.
"But if they took out--if they took out----"

Toft waved his hand again--waved it wildly.

"All right, I understand," Lord Audley said. He had not at first
grasped what was wanted, but the man's repeated gestures enlightened
him. He retired to a position where he was out of the sick man's
sight.

The servant wiped the sweat from his brow. "He mustn't see him!" he
repeated insistently. "Lord! what a turn it gave me. I ask your
pardon, Miss," he continued, "but I know the master so well." He cast
an uneasy glance over his shoulder. "If the master's eyes lit on him
once, only once, when he's in this state, I'd not answer for his
life."

Mary reproached herself. "You are quite right, Toft," she said. "I
ought to have thought of that myself."

"He must not see any strangers!"

"He shall not. You are quite right."

But Toft was still uneasy. He looked round. Stubbs and a man who had
been working in the neighborhood were bringing up a sheep-hurdle, and
again the butler's anxiety overcame him. "D--n!" he said: and he rose
to his feet. "I think they want to kill him amongst them! Why can't
they keep away?"

"Hush! Toft. Why----"

"He mustn't see the lawyer! He must not see him on any account."

Mary nodded. "I will arrange it!" she said. "Only don't excite him.
You will do him harm that way if you are not careful. I will speak to
them."

She went to meet them and explained, while Stubbs, who had not seen
her before, considered her with interest. So this was Miss Audley,
Peter Audley's daughter! She told them that she thought it better that
her uncle should not find strangers about him when he came to himself.
They agreed--it seemed quite natural--and it was arranged that Toft
and the man should carry him as far as the carriage, while Mary walked
beside him; and that afterwards she and Toft should travel with him.
The carriage cushions were placed on the hurdle, and the helpless man
was lifted on to them. Toft and the laborer raised their burden, and
slowly and heavily, with an occasional stagger, they bore it along the
sodden path. Mary saw that the sweat sprang out on Toft's sallow face
and that his knees shook under him. Clearly the man was taxing his
strength to the utmost, and she felt some concern--she had not given
him credit for such fidelity. However, he held out until they reached
the carriage.

Babbling a word now and again, John Audley was moved into the vehicle.
Mary mounted beside him and supported his head, while Toft climbed to
the box, and at a footpace they set off across the sward, the laborer
plodding at the tail of the carriage, and Lord Audley and Stubbs
following a score of paces behind. The rain had ceased, but the clouds
were low and leaden, the trees dripped sadly, and the little
procession across the park had a funereal look. To Mary the way seemed
long, to Toft still longer. With every moment his head was round. His
eyes were now on his master, now jealously cast on those who brought
up the rear. But everything comes to an end, and at length they swung
into the courtyard, where Mrs. Toft, capable and cool, met them and
took a load off Mary's shoulders.

"He's that bad is he?" she said calmly. "Then the sooner he's in his
bed the better. 'Truria's warming it. How will we get him up? I could
carry him myself if that's all. If Toft'll take his feet, I'll do the
rest. No need for another soul to come in!" with a glance at Lord
Audley. "But if they would fetch the doctor I'd not say no, Miss."

"I'll ask them to do that," Mary said.

"And don't you worrit, Miss," Mrs. Toft continued, eyeing the sick man
judicially. "He's been nigh as bad as this before and been about
within the week. There's some as when they wool-gathers, there's no
worse sign. But the master he's never all here, nor all there, and
like a Broseley butter-pot another touch of the kiln will neither make
him nor break him. Now, Toft, wide of the door-post, and steady, man."

Lord Audley and Stubbs had remained outside, but when they saw Mary
coming towards them, the young man left Stubbs and went to meet her.
"How is he?" he asked.

"Mrs. Toft thinks well of him. She has seen him nearly as ill before,
she says. But if he recovers," Mary continued gratefully, "we owe his
life to you. Had you not found him he must have died. And if you had
lost a moment in bringing the news, I am sure that we should have been
too late."

The young man might have given some credit to Stubbs, but he did not;
perhaps because time pressed, perhaps because he felt that his virtue
in resisting a certain temptation deserved its reward. Instead he
looked at Mary with a sympathy so ardent that her eyes fell. "Who
would not have done as much?" he said. "If not for him--for you."

"Will you add one kindness then?" she answered. "Will you send Dr.
Pepper as quickly as possible?"

"Without the loss of a minute," he said. "But one thing before I go. I
cannot come here to inquire, yet I should like to know how he goes on.
Will you walk a little way down the Riddsley road at noon to-morrow,
and tell me how he fares?"

Mary hesitated. But when he had done so much for them, when he had as
good as saved her uncle's life, how could she be churlish? How could
she play the prude? "Of course I will," she said frankly. "I hope I
shall bring a good report."

"Thank you," he said. "Until to-morrow!"




                            CHAPTER XVIII

                           MASKS AND FACES


Cherbuliez opens one of his stories with the remark that if the law of
probabilities ruled, the hero and heroine would never have met, seeing
that the one lived in Venice and the other seldom left Paris. That in
spite of this they fell in with one another was enough to suggest to
the lady that Destiny was at work to unite them.

He put into words a thought which has entertained millions of lovers.
If in face of the odds of three hundred and sixty-four to one Phyllis
shares her birthday with Corydon, if Frederica sprains her ankle and
the ready arm belongs to a Frederic, if Mademoiselle has a _grain de
beauté_ on the right ear, and Monsieur a plain mole on the left--here
is at once matter for reverie, and the heart is given almost before
the hands have met.

This was the fourth occasion on which Audley had come to Mary's
rescue, and, sensible as she was, she was too thoroughly woman to be
proof against the suggestion. On three of the four occasions the odds
had been against his appearance. Yet he had come. To-day in
particular, as if no pain that threatened her could be indifferent to
him, as if no trouble approached her but touched a nerve in him, he
had risen from the very ground to help and sustain her.

Could the coldest decline to feel interest in one so strangely linked
with her by fortune? Could the most prudent in such a case abstain
from day dreams, in which love and service, devotion and constancy,
played their parts?

_Sic itur ad astra!_ So men and women begin to love.

She spent the morning between the room in which John Audley was making
a slow recovery, and the deserted library which already wore a cold
and unused aspect. In the one and the other she felt a restlessness
and a disturbance which she was fain to set down to yesterday's alarm.
The old interests invited her in vain. Do what she would, she could
not keep her mind off the appointment before her. Her eyes grew
dreamy, her thoughts strayed, her color came and went. At one moment
she would plunge into a thousand attentions to her uncle, at another
she opened books only to close them. She looked at the clock--surely
the hands were not moving! She looked again--it could not be as late
as that! The truth was that Mary was not in love, but she was ready to
be in love. She was glad and sorry, grave and gay, without reason;
like a stream that dances over the shallows, and rippling and
twinkling goes its way through the sunshine, knowing nothing of the
deep pool that awaits it.

Presently, acting upon some impulse, she opened a drawer in one of the
tables. It contained a portrait in crayons of Peter Basset, which John
Audley had shown her. She took out the sketch and set it against a
book where the light fell upon it, and she examined it. At first with
a smile--that he should have been so mad as to think what he had
thought! And then with a softer look. How hard she had been to him!
How unfeeling! Nay, how cruel!

She sat for a long time looking at the portrait. But in fact she had
forgotten that it was before her, when the clock, striking the
half--hour before noon, surprised her. Then she thrust the portrait
back into its drawer, and went with a composed face to put on her hat.

The past summer had been one of the wettest ever known, for rain had
fallen on five days out of seven. But to-day it was fine, and as Mary
descended the road that led from the house towards Riddsley, a road
open to the vale on one side and flanked on the other by a rising
slope covered with brushwood, a watery sun was shining. Its rays,
aided by the clearness of the air, brought out the colors of stubble
and field, flood and coppice, that lay below. And men looking up
from toil or pleasure, leaning on spades or pausing before they
crossed a stile, saw the Gatehouse transformed to a fairy lodge, gray,
clear--cut, glittering, breaking the line of forest trees--saw it as
if it had stood in another world.

Mary looked back, looked forward, admired, descended. She had made up
her mind that Lord Audley would meet her at a turn near the foot of
the hill, where a Cross had once stood, and where the crumbling base
and moss-clothed steps still bade travellers rest and be thankful.

He was there, and Mary owned the attraction of the big smiling face
and the burly figure, that in a rough, caped riding-coat still kept an
air of fashion. He on his side saw coming to meet him, through the
pale sunshine, not as yesterday an Atalanta, but a cool Dian, with her
hands in a large muff.

"You bring a good report, I hope?" he cried before they met.

"Very good," Mary replied, sparkling a little as she looked at
him--was not the sun shining? "My uncle is much better this morning.
Dr. Pepper says that it was mainly exertion acting on a weak heart. He
expects him to be downstairs in a week and to be himself in a
fortnight. But he will have to be more careful in future."

"That is good!"

"He says, too, that if you had not acted so promptly, my uncle must
have died."

"Well, he was pretty far gone, I must say."

"So, as he will not thank you himself, you must let me thank you." And
Mary held out the hand she had hitherto kept in her muff. She was
determined not to be a prude.

He pressed it discreetly. "I am glad," he said. "Very glad. Perhaps
after this he may think better of me."

She laughed. "I don't think that there is a chance of it," she said.

"No? Well, I suppose it was foolish, but do you know, I did hope that
this might bring us together."

"You may dismiss it," she answered, smiling.

"Ah!" he said. "Then tell me this. How in the world did he come to be
there? Without a hat? Without a coat? And so far from the house?"

Mary hesitated. He had turned, they were walking side by side. "I am
not sure that I ought to tell you," she said. "What I know I gathered
from a word that Mr. Audley let fall when he was rambling. He seems to
have had some instinct, some feeling that you were there and to have
been forced to learn if it was so."

"But forced? By what?" Lord Audley asked. "I don't understand."

"I don't understand either," Mary answered.

"He could not know that we were there?"

"But he seems to have known."

"Strange," he murmured. "Does he often stray away like that?"

"He does, sometimes," she admitted reluctantly.

"Ah!" Audley was silent a moment. Then, "Well, I am glad he is
better," he said in the tone of one who dismisses a subject. "Let us
talk of something else--ourselves. Are you aware that this is the
fourth time that I have come to your rescue?"

"I know that it is the fourth time that you have been very useful,"
she admitted. She wished that she had been able to control her color,
but though he spoke playfully there was meaning in his voice.

"I, too, have a second sense it seems," he said, almost purring as he
looked at her. "Did you by any chance think of me, when you missed
your uncle?"

"Not for a moment," she retorted.

"Perhaps--you thought of Mr. Basset?"

"No, nor of Mr. Basset. Had he been at the Gatehouse I might have. But
he is away."

"Away, is he? Oh!" He looked at her with a whimsical smile. "Do you
know that when he met us the other evening I thought that he was a
little out of temper? It was not a continuance of that which took him
away, I suppose?"

Mary would have given the world to show an unmoved face at that
moment. But she could not. Nor could she feel as angry as she wished.
"I thought we were going to talk of ourselves," she said.

"I thought that we were talking of you."

On that, "I am afraid that I must be going back," she said. And she
stopped.

"But I am going back with you!"

"Are you? Well, you may come as far as the Cross."

"Oh, hang the Cross!" he answered with a masterfulness of which Mary
owned the charm, while she rebelled against it. "I shall come as far
as I like! And hang Basset too--if he makes you unhappy!" He laughed.
"We'll talk of--what shall we talk of, Mary? Why, we are cousins--does
not that entitle me to call you 'Mary'?"

"I would rather you did not," she said, and this time there was no
lack of firmness in her tone. She remembered what Basset had said
about her name and--and for the moment the other's airiness displeased
her.

"But we are cousins."

"Then you can call me cousin," she answered.

He laughed. "Beaten again!" he said.

"And I can call you cousin," she said sedately. "Indeed, I am going to
treat you as a cousin. I want you, if not to do, to think of doing
something for me. I don't know," nervously, "whether I am asking more
than I ought--if so you must forgive me. But it is not for myself."

"You frighten me!" he said. "What is it?"

"It's about Mr. Colet, the curate whom you helped us to save from
those men at Brown Heath. He has been shamefully treated. What they
did to him might be forgiven--they knew no better. But I hear that
because he preaches what is not to everybody's taste, but what
thousands and thousands are saying, he is to lose his curacy. And
that is his livelihood. It seems most wicked to me, because I am told
that no one else will employ him. And what is he to do? He has no
friends----"

"He has one eloquent friend."

"Don't laugh at me!" she cried.

"I am not laughing," he answered. He was, in fact, wondering how he
should deal with this--this fad of hers. A little, too, he was
wondering what it meant. It could not be that she was in love with
Colet. Absurd! He recalled the look of the man. "I am not laughing,"
he repeated more slowly. "But what do you want me to do?"

"To use your influence for him," Mary explained, "either with the
rector to keep him or with some one else to employ him."

"I see."

"He only did what he thought was his duty. And--and because he did it,
is he to pay with all he has in the world?"

"It seems a hard case."

"It is more, it is an abominable injustice!" she cried.

"Yes," he said slowly. "It seems so. It certainly seems hard. But let
me--don't be angry with me if I put another side." He spoke with
careful moderation. "It is my experience that good, easy men, such as
I take the rector of Riddsley to be, rarely do a thing which seems
cruel, without reason. A clergyman, for instance; he has generally
thought out more clearly than you or I what it is right to say in the
pulpit; how far it is lawful, and then again how far it is wise to
deal with matters of debate. He has considered how far a pronouncement
may offend some, and so may render his office less welcome to them.
That is one consideration. Probably, too, he has considered that a
statement, if events falsify it, will injure him with his poorer
parishioners who look up to him as wiser than themselves. Well, when
such a man has laid down a rule and finds a younger clergyman bent
upon transgressing it, is it unreasonable if he puts his foot down?"

"I had not looked at it in that way."

"And that, perhaps, is not all," he resumed. "You know that a thing
may be true, but that it is not always wise to proclaim it. It may be
too strong meat. It may be true, for instance, that corn-dealers make
an unfair profit out of the poor; but it is not a truth that you would
tell a hungry crowd outside the corn-dealer's shop on a Saturday
night."

"No," Mary allowed reluctantly. "Perhaps not."

"And again--I have nothing to say against Colet. It is enough for me
that he is a friend of yours----"

"I have a reason for being interested in him. I am sure that if you
heard him----"

"I might be carried away? Precisely. But is it not possible that he
has seen much of one side of this question, much of the poverty for
which a cure is sought, without being for that reason fitted to decide
what the cure should be?"

Mary nodded. "Have you formed any opinion yourself?" she asked.

But he was too prudent to enter on a discussion. He saw that so far he
had impressed her with what he had said, and he was not going to risk
the advantage he had gained. "No," he said, "I am weighing the matter
at this moment. We are on the verge of a crisis on the Corn Laws, and
