
"Most mornings Etruria'd let me into the house. But this morning she
found the door unlocked; howsomever she thought nothing of it, for
Toft has a key as well, and since the Master's illness and him coming
and going at all hours, he has not always locked the door; so she made
no remark. A bit before eight Toft came down--I didn't see him but I
heard him--and at eight he took up the Master's cup of tea. Toft makes
it in the pantry and takes it up."

Mrs. Toft paused heavily--not without enjoyment.

"Yes," Mary said anxiously, "and then?"

"I suppose it was five minutes after, he came out to me--I was in the
kitchen getting our breakfast--and he was shaking all over. I don't
know that I ever saw a man more upset. 'He's gone!' he said. 'Law,
Toft,' I said. 'What's the matter? Who's gone?' 'The Master!' he said.
'Fiddlesticks!' says I. 'Where should he go?' And with that I went
into the house and up to the Master's room. When I saw it was empty
you could have knocked me down with a feather! I looked round a bit,
and then I went up to Mr. Basset's room that's over, and down again to
the library, and so forth. By that time Toft was there, gawpin about.
'He's gone!' he kept saying. I don't know as I ever saw Toft truly
upset before."

"And what then?" Mary asked. Twice she had looked through the door,
but to no purpose.

"Well," I said, "if he's not here he can't be far! Don't twitter, man,
but think! It's my belief he's away sleepwalking or what not, to the
place you found him before. On that I gave Toft some brandy and he
went off."

"Shouldn't he be back by now?"

"He should, Miss, if he's not found him," Mrs. Toft answered. "But, if
he's found him, he couldn't carry him! Toft's not all that strong. And
if the Master's lain out long, it's not all the brandy in the world
will bring him round!"

Mary shuddered, and moved by a common impulse the two went out and
crossed the court. The old hound was still at gaze in the gateway,
still staring with purblind eyes down the vistas of the park. "Maybe
he sees more than we see," Mrs. Toft muttered. "He'd not stand there,
would the old dog, as he's stood twenty minutes, for nothing."

She was right, for the next moment three figures appeared hurrying
across the park towards them. It was impossible to mistake Toft's
lanky figure. The others were Etruria, with a shawl about her head,
and the keeper Petch.

Mary scanned them anxiously. "Have they found him?" she murmured.

"No," Mrs. Toft said. "If they'd found him, one would have stopped
with him."

"Of course," Mary said. And heedless of the cold, searching wind that
swung their skirts and carried showers of dead leaves sailing past
them, they waited until Toft and the others, talking together, came
up. Mary saw that, in spite of the pace at which he had walked, Toft's
face was colorless. He was almost livid. His daughter wore an anxious
look, while the keeper was pleasantly excited.

As soon as the three were within hearing, "You've not found him?" Mary
cried.

"No, Miss," Etruria answered.

"Nor any trace?"

"No, Miss. My father has been as far as the iron gate, and found it
locked. It was no use going on."

"He could not have walked farther without help," Mrs. Toft said. "If
the Master's not between us and the gardens he's not that way."

"Then where is he?" Mary cried, aghast. She looked from one to the
other. "Where can he be, Toft?"

Toft raised his hands and let them fall. It was clear that he had
given up hope.

But his wife was of different mettle. "That's to be seen," she said
briskly. "Anyway, you'll be perished here, Miss, and I don't want
another invalid on my hands. We'll go in, if you please."

Mary gave way. They turned to go in, but it was noticeable that as
they moved towards the house each, stirred by the same thought, swept
the extent of the park with eyes that clung to it, and were loth to
leave it. Each hung for a moment, searching this alley or that,
fancying a clue in some distant object, or taking a clump of gorse, or
a jagged stump for the fallen man. All were harassed by the thought
that they might be abandoning him; that in turning their backs on the
bald, wintry landscape they might be carrying away with them his last
chance.

"'T would take a day to search the park," the keeper muttered. "And a
dozen men, I'm afeared, to do it thoroughly."

"Why not take a round yourself!" Mrs. Toft replied. "And if you find
nothing be at the house in an hour, Petch, and we'll know better
what's to do. The poor gentleman's off his head, I doubt, and there's
no saying where he'd wander. But he can't be far, and I'm beginning to
think he's in the house after all."

The man agreed willingly, and strode away across the turf. The others
entered the hall. Mary was for pausing there, but Mrs. Toft swept them
all into the parlor where a good fire was burning. "You'll excuse me,
Miss," she said, "but Toft will be the better for this," and without
ceremony she poured out a cup of coffee, jerked into it a little
brandy from the decanter on the sideboard, and handed it to her
husband. "Drink that," she said, "and get your wits together, man!
You're no better than a wisp of paper now, and it's only you can help
us. Now think! You know him best. Where can he be? Did he say no word
last night to give you a clue?"

A little color came back to Toft's face. He sighed and passed his hand
across his forehead. "If I'd never left him!" he said. "I never ought
to have left him!"

"It's no good going over that!" Mrs. Toft replied impatiently. "He
means, Miss, that up to three nights ago he slept in the Master's
room. Then when the Master seemed better Toft came back to his bed."

"I ought to have stayed with him," Toft repeated. That seemed the one
thought in his mind.

"But where is he?" Mary cried. "Where? Every moment we stand
talking--can't you think where he might go? Are there no
hiding--places in the house? No secret passages?"

Mrs. Toft raised her hands. "Lord's sake!" she exclaimed. "There's the
locked closet in his room where he keeps his papers. I never looked
there. It's seldom opened, and----"

She did not finish. With one accord they hurried through the library
and up the stairs to the old tapestried room, where Mr. Audley had
slept and for the last month had lived. The others had been in it
since his disappearance, Mary had not; and she felt a thrill of awe as
she passed the threshold. The angular faces, the oblique eyes, of the
watchers in the needlework on the wall, that from generation to
generation had looked down on marriage and birth and death--what had
they seen during the past night? On what had they gazed, she asked
herself. Mrs. Toft, less fanciful or more familiar with the room, had
no such thoughts. She crossed the floor to a low door which was
outlined for those who knew of its existence, by rough cuts in the
arras. It led into a closet, contained in one of the turrets.

Mrs. Toft tried the door, shook it, knocked on it. Finally she set her
eye to the keyhole. "He's not there," she said. "There's no key in the
lock. He'd not take out the key, that's certain."

Mary scanned the disordered room. Books lay in heaps on the deep
window-seats, and even on the floor. A table by one of the windows was
strewn with papers and letters; on another beside the bed-head stood a
tray with night drinks, a pair of candles, an antique hour-glass, a
steel pistol. The bedclothes were dragged down, as if the bed had been
slept in, and over the rail at the foot, half hidden by the heavy
curtains, hung a nightgown. She took this up and found beneath it a
pair of slippers and a shoehorn.

"He was dressed then?" she exclaimed.

Toft eyed the things. "Yes, Miss, I've no doubt he was," he said
despondently. "His overcoat's gone."

"Then he meant to leave the house?" Mary cried.

"God save us!"

"He's taken his silver flask too," Etruria said in a low voice. She
was examining the dressing-table. "And his watch."

"His watch?"

"Yes, Miss."

"But that's odd," Mary said, fixing her eyes on Toft. "Don't you
think that's odd? If my uncle had rambled out in some nightmare or--or
wandering, would he have taken his flask and his watch, Toft? Are his
spectacles there?"

Toft inspected the table, raised the pillow, felt under the bolster.
"No, Miss," he said; "he's taken them."

"Ah!" Mary replied; "then I have hope. Wherever he is, he is in his
senses. Now, Toft!"--she looked hard at the man--"think again! Surely
since he had this in his mind last night he must have let something
drop? Some word?"

The man shook his head. "Not that I heard, Miss," he said.

Mary sighed. But Mrs. Toft was less patient. She exploded. "You
gaby!" she cried. "Where's your senses? It's to you we're looking, and
a poor stick you are in time of trouble! I couldn't have believed it!
Find your tongue, Toft, say something! You knew the Master down to his
shoe leather. Let's hear what you do think! He couldn't walk far! He
couldn't walk a mile without help. Where is he? Where do you think he
is?"

Toft's answer silenced them. If one of the mute, staring figures on
the walls--that watched as from the boxes of a theatre the living
actors--had stepped down, it would hardly have affected them more
deeply. The man sat down on the bed, covered his face with his hands,
and rocking himself to and fro broke into a passion of weeping. "The
poor Master!" he cried between his sobs. "The poor Master!"

Quickly at that Mary's feelings underwent a change. As if she had
stood already beside her uncle's grave, sorrow took the place of
perplexity. His past kindness dragged at her heart-strings. She forgot
that she had never been able to love him, she forgot that behind the
man whom she had known she had been ever conscious of another being,
vague, shifting, inhuman. She remembered only the help he had given,
the home he had offered, the rare hours of sympathy. "Don't, Toft,
don't!" she cried, tears in her voice. She touched the man on the
shoulder. "Don't give up hope!"

As for Mrs. Toft, surprise silenced her. When she found her voice,
"Well," she said, looking round her with a sort of pride, "who'll say
after this that Toft's a hard man? Why, if the Master was lying on
that bed ready for burial--and we're some way off that, the Lord be
thanked!--he couldn't carry on more! But there, let's look now, and
weep afterwards! Pull yourself together, Toft, or who's the young lady
to depend on? If you take my advice, Miss," she continued, "we'll get
out of this room. It always did give me the fantods with them
Egyptians staring at me from the walls, and to-day it's worse than a
hearse! Now downstairs----"

"You are quite right, Mrs. Toft," Mary said. "We'll go downstairs."
She shared to the full Mrs. Toft's distaste for the room. "We're doing
no good here, and your husband can follow us when he is himself again.
Petch should be back by this time, and we ought to arrange what is to
be done outside."

Toft made no demur, and they went down. They found the keeper waiting
in the hall. He had made no discovery, and Mary, to whom Toft's
breakdown had given fresh energy, took things into her own hands. She
gave Petch his orders. He must get together a dozen men, and search
the park and every place within a mile of the Gatehouse. He must
report by messenger every two hours to the house, and in the meantime
he must send a man on horseback to the town for Dr. Pepper.

"And Mr. Basset?" Mrs. Toft murmured.

"I will write a note to Mr. Basset," Mary said, "and the man must send
it by post-horses from the Audley Arms. I will write it now." She sat
down in the library, cold as the room was, and scrawled three lines,
telling Basset that her uncle had disappeared during the night, and
that, ill as he was, she feared the worst.

Then, when Petch had gone to get his men together--a task which would
take time as there were no farms at hand--she and Mrs. Toft searched
the house room by room, while Etruria and her father went again
through the outbuildings. But the quest was as fruitless as the former
search had been.

Mary had known many unhappy days in Paris, days of anxiety, of
loneliness, of apprehension, when she had doubted where she would
lodge or what she would eat for her next meal. Now she had a source of
strength in her engagement and her love, which should have been
inexhaustible. But she never forgot the misery of this day, nor ever
looked back on it without a shudder. Probably there were moments when
she sat down, when she took a tasty meal, when she sought Mrs. Toft in
her warm kitchen or talked with Etruria before her own fire. But as
she remembered the day, she spent the long hours gazing across the
wintry park; now catching a glimpse of the line of beaters as it
appeared for a moment crossing a glade, now watching the approach of
the messenger who came to tell her that they had found nothing; or
again straining her eyes for the arrival of Dr. Pepper, who, had she
known it, was at the deathbed of an old patient, ten miles on the
farther side of Riddsley.

Now and again a hailstorm swept across the park, and Mrs. Toft came
out and scolded her into shelter; or a farmer, whose men had been
borrowed, "happened that way," and after a gruff question touched his
hat and went off to join the searchers. Once a distant cry seemed to
herald a discovery, and she tried to steady her leaping pulses. But
nothing came of it except some minutes of anxiety. And once her
waiting ear caught the clang of the bell that hung in the hall and she
flew through the house to the front door, only to learn that the
visitor was the carrier who three times a week called for letters on
his way to town. The dreary house with its open doors, its cold
draughts, its unusual aspect, the hurried meals, the furtive glances,
the hours of suspense and fear--these stamped the day for ever on
Mary's memory: as sometimes an hour of loneliness prints itself on the
mind of a child who all his life long hears with distaste the clash of
wedding bells.

At length the wintry day with its gusts of snow began to draw in.
Before four Petch sent in to say that he had beaten the park and also
the gardens at the Great House, but had found nothing. Half his men
were now searching the slope on either side of the Riddsley road. With
the other half he was going to explore, while the light lasted, the
fringe of the Chase towards Brown Heath.

That left Mary face to face with the night; with the long hours of
darkness, which inaction must render infinitely worse than those of
the day. She had visions of the windswept park, the sullen ponds, the
frozen moorland; they spread before her fraught with some brooding
terror. She had never much marked, she had seldom felt the loneliness
of the house. Now it pressed itself upon her, isolated her, menaced
her. It made the thought of the night, that lay before her, almost
unbearable.




                            CHAPTER XXVII

                        A FOOTSTEP IN THE HALL


Mrs. Toft bringing in candles, and looking grave enough herself,
noticed the girl's pale face and chid her gently. "I don't believe
that you've sat down this blessed day, Miss!" she said. "Nor no more
than looked at good food. But tea you shall have and sit down to it,
or my name's not Anne Toft! Fretting's no manner of use, and fasting's
a poor stick to beat trouble with!"

"But, Mrs. Toft," Mary said, her face piteous, "it's the thought that
he may be lying out there, helpless and dying, while we sit here----"

"Steady, Miss! Giving way does no good, and too much mind's worse than
none. If he's out there he's gone, poor gentleman, long ago. And Dr.
Pepper'll say the same. It's not in reason he should be alive if he's
in the open. And, God knows, if he's under cover it's little better."

"But then if he is alive!" Mary cried. "Think of another night!"

"Ay, I know," Mrs. Toft said. "And hard it is! But you've been a model
all this blessed day, and it's no time to break down now. Where that
dratted doctor is, beats me, though he could do no more than we've
done! But there, Mr. Basset will be with us to-morrow, and he'll find
the poor gentleman dead or alive! There's some as are more to look at
than the Squire, but there's few I'd put before him at a pinch!"

"Where's Toft?" Mary asked.

"He went to join Petch two hours ago," Mrs. Toft explained. "And there
again, take Toft. He's a good husband, but there's no one would say he
was a man to wear his heart outside. But you saw how hard he took it?
I don't know," Mrs. Toft continued thoughtfully, "as I've seen Toft
shed a tear these twenty years--no, nor twice since we went to
church!"

"You don't think," Mary asked, "that he knows more than he has told
us?"

The question took Mrs. Toft aback. "Why, Miss," she said, "you don't
mean as you think he was putting on this morning?"

"No," Mary answered. "But is it possible that he knows the worst and
does not tell us?"

"And why shouldn't he tell us? It would be strange if he wouldn't tell
his own wife? And you that's Mr. Audley's nearest!"

"It's all so strange," Mary pleaded. "My uncle is gone. Where has he
gone?"

Mrs. Toft did not answer the question. She could not. And there came
an interruption. "That's Petch's voice," she said. "They're back."

The men trooped into the hall. They advanced to the door of the
parlor, Petch leading, a man whom Mary did not know next to him, after
these a couple of farmers and Toft, in the background a blur of faces
vaguely seen.

"We've found something, Miss," Petch said. "At least Tom has. But I'm
not sure it lightens things much. He was going home by the Yew Tree
Walk and pretty close to the iron gate, when what should he see lying
in the middle of the walk but this!"

Petch held out a silver flask.

"It's the Master's, sure enough," Mrs. Toft said.

"Ay," Petch answered. "But the odd thing is, I searched that place
before noon, a'most inch by inch, looking for footprints, and I went
over it again when we were beating the Yew Tree Walk this afternoon,
and I'm danged if that flask was there then!"

"I don't think as you could ha' missed it, Mr. Petch," the finder
said, "it was that bright and plain!"

"But isn't the grass long there?" Mary asked. She had already as much
mystery as she could bear and wanted no addition to it.

"Not that long," said Tom.

"No, not that long, the lad's right," Petch added. "I warrant I must
have seen it."

"That you must, Mr. Petch," a lad in the background said. "I was next
man, and I wondered when you'd ha' done that bit."

"But I don't understand," Mary answered. "If it was not there, this
morning----"

"I don't understand neither, lady," the keeper rejoined. "But it is on
my mind that there's foul play!"

"Oh, but," Mary protested, "who--why should any one hurt my uncle?"

"I can't say as to that," Petch replied, darkly. "I don't know anybody
as would. But there's the flask, and flasks don't travel without
hands. If he took it out of the house with him----"

"May he not have dropped it--this afternoon?" Mary suggested. "Suppose
he wandered that way after you passed?"

The keeper shook his head. "If he had passed that way this afternoon
it isn't one but six pairs of eyes would ha' seen him."

There was a murmur of assent. The searchers were keenly enjoying the
drama, taking in every change that appeared on the girl's face. They
were men into whose lives not much of drama entered.

"But I cannot think that what you say is likely!" Mary protested. She
had held her own stoutly through the day, but now with the eyes of all
these men upon her she grew bewildered. The rows of faces, the bashful
hands twisting caps, the blurred white of smocked frocks--grew and
multiplied and became misty. She had to grasp the table to steady
herself.

Mrs. Toft saw how it was, and came to the rescue. "What's Toft say
about it?" she asked.

"Ay, to be sure, missus," Petch agreed. "I dunno as he's said anything
yet."

"I don't think the Master could have passed and not been seen," Toft
replied. His tone was low, and in the middle of his speech he
shivered. "But I'm not saying that the flask wasn't there this
morning. It's a small thing."

"It couldn't have been overlooked, Mr. Toft," the keeper replied
firmly. "I speak as I know!"

Again Mrs. Toft intervened. "I'm sure nobody would ha' laid a hand on
the Master!" she said. "Nobody in these parts and nobody foreign, as I
can fancy. I've no doubt at all the poor gentleman awoke with some
maggot in his brain and wandered off, not knowing. The question is,
what can we do? The young lady's had a sad day, and it's time she was
left to herself."

"There's nothing we can do now," Petch said flatly. "It stands to
reason if we've found nothing in the daylight we'll find nothing in
the dark. We'll be back at eight in the morning. Whether we'd ought to
let his lordship know----"

"Sho!" said Mrs. Toft with scorn. "What's he in it, I'd like to know?
But there, you've said what you come to say and it's time we left the
young lady to herself."

Mary raised her head. "One moment," she said. "I want to thank you all
for what you've done. And for what Petch says about the flask, he's
right to speak out, but I can't think any one would touch my uncle.
Only--can we do nothing? Nothing more? Nothing at all? If we don't
find him to-night----" She broke off, overcome by her feelings.

"I'm afraid not, Miss," Petch said gently. "We'd all be willing,
but we don't know where to look. I own I'm fair beat. Still Tom and
I'll stay an hour or two with Toft in case of anything happening.
Good-night, Miss. You're very welcome, I'm sure."

The others murmured their sympathy as they trooped out into the
darkness. Mrs. Toft bustled away for the tea, and Mary was left alone.

Suspense lay heavy on her. She felt that she ought to be doing
something and she did not know what to do. Dr. Pepper did not come,
the Tofts were but servants. They could not take the onus, they could
not share her burden; and Toft was a broken reed. Meanwhile time
pressed. Hours, nay, minutes might make all the difference between
life and death.

When Etruria came in with Mary's tea she found her mistress bending
over the fire in an attitude of painful depression, and she said a few
words, trying to impart to her something of her own patience. That
patience was a fine thing in Etruria because it was natural. But Mary
was of sterner stuff. She had a more lively imagination, and she could
not be blind to the issues, or to the value of every moment that
passed. Even while she listened to Etruria she saw with the eyes of
fancy a hollow amid a clump of trees not far from a pool that she
knew. In summer it was a pleasant dell, clothed with mosses and ferns
and the flowers of the bog-bean; in winter a dank, sombre hollow.
There she saw her uncle lie, amid the decaying leaves, the mud, the
rank grass; and the vision was too much for her. What if he were
really lying there, while she sat here by the fire? Sat here in this
home which he--he had given her, amid the comforts which he had
provided!

The thought was horrible, and she turned fiercely on the comforter.
"Don't!" she cried. "You don't think! You don't understand! We can't
go through the night like this! They must go on looking! Fetch your
father! And bring Petch! Bring them here!" she cried.

Etruria went, alarmed by her excitement, but almost as quickly she
came back. Toft had gone out with Petch and the other man. They would
not be long.

Mary cried out on them, but could do no more than walk the room, and
after a time Etruria coaxed her to sit down and eat; and tea and food
restored her balance. Still, as she sat and ate she listened--she
listened always. And Etruria, taught by experience, let her be and
said nothing.

At last, "How long they are!" Mary cried. "What are they doing? Are
they never----"

She stopped. The footsteps of two men coming through the hall had
reached her ears, and she recognized the tread of one--recognized it
with a rush of relief so great, of thankfulness so overwhelming that
she was startled and might well have been more than startled, had she
been free to think of anything but the lost man. It was Basset's step,
and she knew it--she would have known it, she felt, among a hundred!
He had come! An instant later he stood in the doorway, booted and
travel-stained, his whip in his hand, just as he had dropped from the
saddle--and with a face grave indeed, but calm and confident. He
seemed to her to bring relief, help, comfort, safety, all in one!

"Oh!" she cried. "You are here! How--how good of you!"

"Not good at all," he answered, advancing to the table and quietly
taking off his gloves. "Your messenger met me half-way to Blore. I was
coming into Riddsley to a meeting. I had only to ride on. Of course I
came."

"But the meeting?" she asked fearfully. Was he only come to go again?

"D--n the meeting!" he answered, moved to anger by the girl's pale
face. "Will you give me a cup of tea, Toft? I will hear Miss Audley's
account first. Keep Petch and the other man. We shall want them. In
twenty minutes I'll talk to you. That will do."

Ah, with what gratitude, with what infinite relief, did Mary hear his
tone of authority! He watched Toft out of the room and, alone with
her, he looked at her. He saw that her hand shook as she filled the
teapot, that her lips quivered, that she tried to speak and could not.
And he felt an infinite love and pity, though he drove both out of his
voice when he spoke. "Yes, tea first," he said coolly, as he took off
his riding coat. "I've had a long journey. You must take another cup
with me. You can leave things to me now. Yes, two lumps, please, and
not too strong." He knocked together the logs, and warmed his hands,
stooping over the fire with his back to her. Then he took his place at
the table, and when he had drunk half a cup of tea, "Now," he said,
"will you tell me the story from the beginning. And take time. More
haste, less speed, you know."

With a calmness that surprised herself, Mary told the tale. She
described the first alarm, the hunt through the house, the discoveries
in the bedroom, Toft's breakdown, last of all the search through the
park and the finding of the flask.

He listened gravely, asking a question now and then. When she had
done, "What of Toft?" he inquired. "Not been very active, has he? Not
given you much help?"

"No! But how did you guess?" she asked in surprise.

"I'm afraid that Toft knows more than he has told you. For the rest,"
he looked at her kindly, "I want you to give up the hope of finding
your uncle alive. I have none. But I think I can promise you that
there has been no suffering. If it turns out as I imagine, he was dead
before he was missed. What the doctor expected has happened. That is
all."

"I don't understand," she said.

"And I don't want to say more until I know for certain. May I ring for
Toft?" She nodded. He rang, and after a pause, during which he stood,
silent and waiting, the servant came in. He shot a swift glance at
them, and dropped his eyes.

"Tell Petch and the other man to be ready to start with us in five
minutes," Basset said. "Let them fetch a hurdle, and do you put a
mattress on it. I suppose--you made sure he was dead, Toft, before you
left him?"

The man flinched before the sudden question, but he showed less
emotion than Mary. Perhaps he had expected it. After a pause, during
which Basset did not take his eyes from him, "I made sure," he said in
a low voice. "As God sees me, I did! But if you think I raised a hand
to him----"

"I don't!" Basset said sternly. "I don't think so badly of you as
that. But nothing but frankness can save you now. Is he in the Great
House?"

Toft opened his mouth, but he seemed unable to speak. He nodded.

"What about the flask?"

"I dropped it," the man muttered. He turned a shade paler. "I could
not bear to think he was lying there. I thought it would lead the
search--that way, and they would find him."

"I see. That's enough now. Be ready to start at once."

The man went out. "Good heavens!" Mary cried. She was horror-stricken.
"And he has known it all this time! Do you think that he--he had any
part----"

"Oh no. He was alone with Mr. Audley when he collapsed, and he lost
his head. They were together in the Great House--it was a difficult
position--and he did not see his way to explain. He may have seen
some advantage in gaining time--I don't know. The first thing to be
done is to bring your uncle home. I will see to that. You have borne
up nobly--you have done your part. Do you go to bed now."

Something in his tone, and in his thought for her, brought old times
to Mary's mind and the blood to her pale cheek. She did not say no,
but she would not go to bed. She made Etruria come to her, and the two
girls sat in the parlor listening and waiting, moving only when it was
necessary to snuff the candles. It was a grim vigil. An hour passed,
two hours. At length they caught the first distant murmur, the tread
of men who moved slowly and heavily under a burden--there are few who
have not at one time or another heard that sound. Little by little the
shuffling feet, the subdued orders, the jar of a stumbling bearer,
drew nearer, became more clear. A gust of wind swept through the hall,
and moaned upwards through the ancient house. The candles on the table
flickered. And still the two sat spell-bound, clasping cold hands, as
the unseen procession passed over the threshold, and for the last time
John Audley came home to sleep amid his books--heedless now of right
or claim, or rank or blood.

                          *   *   *   *   *

A few minutes later Basset entered the parlor. His face betrayed his
fatigue, and his first act was to go to the sideboard and drink a
glass of wine. Mary saw that his hand shook as he raised the glass,
and gratitude for what he had done for her brought the tears to her
eyes. He stood a moment, leaning in utter weariness against the
wall--he had ridden far that day. And Mary had been no woman if she
had not drawn comparisons.

Opportunity had served him, and had not served the other. Nor, had her
betrothed been here, could he have helped her in this pinch. He could
not have taken Basset's place, nor with all the will in the world
could he have done what Basset had done.

That was plain. Yet deep down in her there stirred a faint resentment,
a complaint hardly acknowledged. Audley was not here, but he might
have been. It was his doing that she had not told her uncle, and that
John Audley had passed away in ignorance. It was his doing that in her
trouble she had had to lean on the other. It was not the first time
during the long hours of the day that the thought had come to her; and
though she had put it away, as she put it away now, the opening flower
of love is delicate--the showers pass but leave their mark.

When Etruria had slipped out, and left them, Basset came forward,
and warmed himself at the fire. "Perhaps it is as well you did not go
to bed," he said. "You can go now with an easy mind. It was as I
thought--he lay on the stairs of the Great House and he had been dead
many hours. Dr. Pepper will tell us more to-morrow, but I have no
doubt that he died of syncope brought on by exertion. Toft had tried
to give him brandy."

Shocked and grieved, yet sensible of relief, she was silent for a
time. She had known John Audley less than a year, but he had been good
to her in his way and she sorrowed for him. But at least she was freed
from the nightmare which had ridden her all day. Or was she? "May I
know what took him there?" she asked in a low voice. "And Toft?"

"He believed that there were papers in the Great House, which would
prove his claim. It was an obsession. He asked me more than once to go
with him and search for them, and I refused. He fell back on Toft.
They had begun to search--so Toft tells me--when Mr. Audley was taken
ill. Before he could get him down the stairs, the end came. He sank
down and died."

With a shudder Mary pictured the scene in the empty house. She saw the
light of the lantern fall on the huddled group, as the panic-stricken
servant strove to pour brandy between the lips of the dying man; and
truly she was thankful that in this strait she had Basset to support
her, to assist her, to advise her! "It is very dreadful," she said. "I
do not wonder that Toft gave way. But had he--had my uncle--any right
to be there?"

"In his opinion, yes. And if the papers were there, they were his
papers, the house was his, all was his. In my opinion he was wrong.
But if he believed anything, he believed that he was justified in what
he did."

"I am glad of that!"

"There must be an inquest, I am afraid," Basset continued. "One or two
will know, and one or two more will guess what Mr. Audley's errand
was. But Lord Audley will have nothing to gain by moving in it. And if
only for your sake--but you must go to bed. Etruria is waiting in the
hall. I will send her to you. Good-night."

She stood up. She wished to thank him, she longed to say something,
anything, which would convey to him what his coming had been to her.
But she could not find words, she was tongue-tied. And Etruria came
in.




                            CHAPTER XXVIII

                        THE NEWS FROM RIDDSLEY


The business which had taken Audley away on the morrow of his
engagement had been no mere pretext. The crisis in political life
which Peel's return to office had brought about was one of those
upheavals which are of rare promise to the adventurous. The wise
foresaw that the party which Sir Robert had led would be riven from
top to bottom. Old allies would be flung into opposing camps, and
would be reaching out every way for support. New men would be learning
their value, and to those who dared, all things might be added.
Places, prizes, honors, all might be the reward of those who knew how
to choose their side with prudence and to support it with courage. The
clubs were like hives of bees. All day long and far into the winter
night Pall Mall roared under the wheels of carriages. About the doors
of Whitehall Gardens, where Peel lived, men gathered like vultures
about the prey. And, lo, in a twinkling and as by magic the
Conservative party vanished in a cloud of dust, to reappear a few days
later in the guise of Peelites and Protectionists--Siamese twins, who
would not live together, and could not live apart.

At such a time it was Audley's first interest to be as near as
possible to the hub of things and to place himself in evidence as a
man concerned. He had a little influence in the Foreign Office, he had
his vote in the House of Lords. And though he did not think that these
would suffice, he trusted that, reinforced by the belief that he
carried the seat at Riddsley in his pocket, they might be worth
something to him.

Unfortunately he could deal with one side only. If Stubbs were right
he could pass for the owner of the borough only as long as he opposed
Sir Robert. He could return the younger Mottisfont and have the credit
of returning him, in the landed interest; but however much it might
suit his book--and it was of that book he was thinking as he travelled
to Lord Seabourne's--he could not, if Stubbs were right, return a
member in the other interest.

Now when a man can sell to one party only, tact is needed if he is to
make a good bargain. Audley saw this. But he knew his own qualities
and he did not despair. The occasion was unique, and he thought that
it would be odd if he could not pluck from the confusion something
worth having; some place under the Foreign Office, a minor embassy, a
mission, something worth two, or three, or even four thousand a year.

He travelled up to town thinking steadily of the course he would
pursue, and telling himself that he must be as cunning as the serpent
and as gentle as the dove. He must let no whip cajole him, and no Tory
browbeat him. For he had only this to look to now: a rich marriage was
no longer among the possibilities. Not that he regretted his decision
in that matter as yet, but at times he wondered at it. He told himself
that he had been impulsive, and setting this down to the charms of his
mistress he gave himself credit for disinterested motives. And then,
too, he had made himself safe!

Still there were difficulties in the way of his ambition, which
appeared more clearly at Seabourne Castle, where Lady Adela was a
fellow-guest, and in London than at Riddsley; difficulties of shrewd
whips, who knew the history of the borough by heart, and had figures
at their fingers' ends; difficulties of arrogant leaders, who talked
of his duty to the land and assumed that duty was its own reward.
Above all, there was the difficulty that he could only sell to the
party that was out of office and must pay in promises--bills drawn at
long dates and for which no discounters could be found. For who could
say when the landed interest, made up of stupid bull-headed men like
Lord George Bentinck and Stubbs, a party without a leader and with
divided counsels, would be in power? They were a mob rather than a
party, and like every other mob were ready to sacrifice future
prospects to present revenge.

That was a terrible difficulty, and his lordship did not see how he
was to get over it. To the Peelites who could pay, cash down, in
honors and places, he could not sell. Nor to the Liberals under little
Lord John, though to their promises some prospect of office gave
value. So that at times he almost despaired. For he had only this to
look to now; if he failed in this he would have love and he would have
Mary, and he would have safety, but very little besides. If his word
had not been given to Mary, he might almost have reconsidered the
matter.

The die was cast, however. Yet many a man has believed this, and then
one fine morning he has begun to wonder if it is so--the cast was such
an unlucky, if not an unfair one! And presently he has seen that at
the cost of a little pride, or a little consistency, or what not, he
might call the game drawn. That is, he might--if he were not the soul
of honor that he is!

By and by under the stress of circumstances his lordship began to
consider that point. He did not draw back, he did not propose to draw
back; but he thought that he would keep the door behind him ajar. To
begin with, he did not overwhelm Mary with letters--his public
engagements were so many; and when he wrote he wrote on ordinary
matters. His pen ran more glibly on party gossip than on their joint
future; he wrote as he might have written to a cousin rather than to
his sweetheart. But he told himself that Mary was not versed in love
letters, nor very passionate. She would expect no more.

Then one fine morning he had a letter from Stubbs, which told him that
there was to be a real contest in Riddsley, that the Horn and Corn
platform was to be challenged, and that the assailant was Peter
Basset. Stubbs added that the Working Men's Institute was beside
itself with joy, that Hatton's and Banfield's hands were solid for
repeal, and that the fight would be real, but that the issue was a
foregone conclusion.

The news was not altogether unwelcome. The contest gave value to the
seat, and increased my lord's claim; on that party, unfortunately,
they could only pay in promises. It also tickled my lord's vanity. His
rival, unhorsed in the lists of love, had betaken himself, it seemed,
to other lists, in which he would as surely be beaten.

"Poor beggar!" Audley thought. "He was always a day late! Always came
in second! I don't know that I ever knew anything more like him than
this! From the day I first saw him, standing behind John Audley's
counsel at the suit, right to this day, he has always been a loser!"

And he smiled as he recalled the poor figure Basset had cut as a
squire of dames.

A week later Stubbs wrote again, and this time his news was startling.
John Audley was dead. Stubbs wrote in the first alarm of the
discovery, word of which had just been brought into the town. He knew
no particulars, but thought that his lordship should be among the
first to learn the fact. He added a hasty postscript, in which he said
that Mr. Basset was proving himself a stronger candidate than either
side had expected, and that not only were the brass-workers with him
but a few of the smaller fry of tradesmen, caught by his cry of cheap
bread. Stubbs closed, however, with the assurance that the landed
interest would carry it by a solid majority.

"D--n their impudence!" Lord Audley exclaimed. And after that he gave
no further heed to the postscript. As long as the issue was certain,
the election was Mottisfont's and Stubbs's affair. As for Basset, the
more money he chose to waste the better.

But John Audley's death was news--it was great news! So he was gone at
last--the man whom he had always regarded as a menace! Whom he had
feared, whose very name had rung mischief in his ears, by whom, during
many a sleepless night, he had seen himself ousted from all that he
had gained from title, income, lands, position! He was gone at last;
and gone with him were the menace, the danger, the night alarms, the
whole pile of gloomy fancies which apprehension had built up!

The relief was immense. Audley read the letter twice, and it seemed to
him that a weight was lifted from him. John Audley was dead. In his
dressing-gown and smoking-cap my lord paced his rooms at the Albany
and said again and again, "He's dead! By gad, he's dead!" Later, he
could not refrain from the thought that if the death had taken place a
few weeks earlier, in that first attack, he would have been under no
temptation to make himself safe. As it was--but he did not pursue the
thought. He only reflected that he had followed love handsomely!

A day later a third letter came from Stubbs, and one from Mary. The
tidings they brought were such that my lord's face fell as he read
them, and he swore more than once over them. John Audley, the lawyer
wrote, had been found dead in the Great House. He had been found lying
on the stairs, a lantern beside him. Stubbs had visited the house the
moment the facts became known. He had examined the muniment room and
found part of the wall broken down, and in the room two boxes of
papers which had been taken from a recess which the breach had
disclosed. One of the boxes had been broken open. At present Stubbs
could only say that the papers had been disturbed, he could not say
whether any were missing. He begged his lordship--he was much
disturbed, it was clear--to come down as quickly as possible. In the
meantime, he would go through the papers and prepare a report. They
appeared to be family documents, old, and not hitherto known to his
lordship's advisers.

Audley was still swearing, when his man came in. "Will you wear the
black velvet vest, my lord?" he asked, "or the flowered satin?"

"Go to the devil!" his master cried--so furiously that the man fled
without more.

When he was gone Audley read the letter again, and came to the
conclusion that in making himself safe he had builded more wisely than
he knew. For who could say what John Audley had found? Or who, through
those papers, had a hold on him? He remembered the manservant's visit,
and the thing looked black. Very black. Alive or dead, John Audley
threatened him.

Then he felt bitterly angry with Stubbs. There had been the most
shocking carelessness. Had he not himself pointed out what was going
on? Had he not put it to Stubbs that the place should be guarded? But
the lawyer, stubborn in his belief that there were no papers there,
had done nothing. Nothing! And this had come of it! This which might
spell ruin!

Or, no. Stubbs had indeed done his best to ruin him, but he had saved
himself. He turned with relief to Mary's letter.

It was written sadly, and it was rather cold. He noticed this, but her
tone did not alarm him, because he set it down to the reserve of his
own letters.

He took care to answer this letter, however, by that day's post, and
he wrote more affectionately than before--as if her trouble had broken
down a reserve natural to him. He wrote with tact, too. He could not
attend the funeral; the dead man's feelings towards him forbade that
he should. But his agent would attend, and his carriage and servants.
When he had written the letter he was satisfied with it: more than
satisfied when he had added a phrase implying that their happiness
would not long be postponed.

After he had posted the letter he wondered if she would expect him to
come to her. It was a lonely house and with death in it--but no, in
the circumstances it was not possible. He would go down to The
Butterflies next day. That would be the most that could be expected of
him. He would be at hand if she needed anything.

But when the next day came he did not go. A letter from a man
belonging to the inner circle of politics reached him. The great man,
who had been and might be again in the Cabinet, suggested a meeting.
Nothing came of the meeting--it was one of those will-of-the-wisps
that draw the unwary on until they find themselves committed. But it
kept Audley in London, and it was not until the evening of Monday, the
day of the funeral, that, chilled and out of temper, after posting the
last stage from Stafford, he reached his quarters at The Butterflies,
and gave short answers to Mrs. Jenkinson's inquiries after his health.

"Poor dear young man!" she said, when she rejoined her sisters. "He
has a kind heart and he feels it. Mr. John was Mr. John, and odd, very
odd. But still he was an Audley!"




                             CHAPTER XXIX

                           THE AUDLEY BIBLE


Angry with Stubbs as he was--and with some reason--Lord Audley was
not the man to bite off his nose to spite his face. He pondered long
what he would say to him, and more than once he rehearsed the scene,
toning down this phrase and pruning that. For he knew that after all
Stubbs was a good agent. He was honest, he thought much and made much
of the property, and nothing would be gained by changing him. Then his
influence in the borough was such that even if my lord quarrelled with
him, Mottisfont would hardly venture to discard him.

For these reasons Audley had no mind to break with his agent. But he
did wish to punish him. He did wish to make his displeasure felt. And
he wished this the more because he began to suspect that if Stubbs had
been less bigoted, he might have carried the borough the way he
wished--the way that would pay him best.

Stubbs on his side foresaw an unpleasant quarter of an hour. He had
been too easy. He had paid too little heed to John Audley's
trespasses, and had let things pass that he should have stopped. Then,
too, he had been over-positive that there were no more documents at
the Great House. Evil had not come of this, but it might have; and he
made up his mind to hear some hard words.

But when he obeyed my lord's summons his reception tried his patience.
A bright fire burned in the grate, half a dozen wax candles shed a
softened light on the room. The wine stood at Audley's elbow, and his
glass was half full. But he did not give Stubbs even two fingers, nor
did he ask him to take wine. And his tone was colder than Stubbs had
ever known it. He made it plain that he was receiving a servant, and a
servant with whom he was displeased.

Still he was Lord Audley, something of divine right survived in him,
and Stubbs knew that he had been himself in the wrong. He took the
bull by the horns. "You are displeased, my lord," he said, as he took
the seat to which the other pointed. "And I admit with some cause. I
have been mistaken and, perhaps, a little remiss! But it is the
exception, and it will be a lesson to me. I am sorry, my lord," he
added frankly. "I can say no more than that."

"And much good that will do us," my lord growled, "in certain events,
Mr. Stubbs!"

"At any rate it will be a sharp lesson to me," Stubbs replied. "It has
cost Mr. Audley his life."

"He had no right to be there!"

"No, my lord, he had no right to be there. But he would not have been
there if I had seen that the place was properly secured. I take all
the blame."

"Unfortunately," the other flung at him contemptuously, "you cannot
pay the penalty; that may fall upon me. Anyway, it was a d--d silly
thing, Mr. Stubbs, to leave the place open, and you see what has come
of it."

"I cannot deny it, my lord," Stubbs said patiently. "But I hope that
nothing will come of it. I will tell your lordship first what my own
observations were. I made a careful examination of the two chests of
papers and I came to the conclusion that Mr. Audley had done little
more than open the first when he was taken ill. One chest showed some
disturbance. The upper layer had been taken out and replaced. The
other box had not been opened."

"What if he found what he wanted and searched no further?" Audley
asked grimly. "But the point of the matter does not lie there. It lies
in another direction, as I should have thought any lawyer would see."

"My lord?"

"Who was with him?" Lord Audley rapped the table with his fingers.
"That's the point, sir! Who was with him?"

"I think I have ascertained that," Stubbs replied, less put out than
his employer expected. "I have little doubt that his man-servant, a
man called Toft, was with him."

"Ha!" the other exclaimed, "I expected that!"

Stubbs raised his eyebrows. "You know him, my lord?"

"I know him for a d--d blackmailing villain!" Audley broke out. Then
he remembered himself. He had not told Stubbs of the blackmailing.
And, after all, what did it matter? He had made himself safe. Whatever
papers he had found, John Audley was dead, and John Audley's heiress
was going to be his wife! The danger to him was naught, and the
blackmailer was already disarmed. Still he was not going to spare
Stubbs by telling him that. Instead, "What did the boxes contain?" he
asked ungraciously.

"Nothing of any value when I examined them, my lord. Old surrenders,
fines, and recoveries with some ancient terriers. I could find no
document among them that related to the title."

"That may be," Audley retorted. "But John Audley expected to find
something that related to the title! He knew more than we knew. He
knew that those boxes existed, and he knew what he expected to find in
them."

"No doubt. And if your lordship had given me a little more time I
should have explained before this that he was disappointed in his
expectation; nay, more, that it was that disappointment--as I have
little doubt--that caused his collapse and death."

"How the devil do you know that?"

"If your lordship will have patience I will explain," Stubbs said, a
gleam of malice in his eyes. He rose from his seat and took from a
chair beside the door a parcel which he had laid there on his
entrance. "I have here that which he found, and that which I don't
doubt caused his death."

"The deuce you have!" Audley cried, rising to his feet in his
surprise. And he watched with all his eyes while the lawyer slowly
untied the tape and spread wide the wrappers. The action disclosed a
thick quarto volume bound in blue leather, sprinkled on the sides with
silver butterflies, and stamped with the arms of Audley. "Good G--d!"
Audley continued, "the Family Bible!"

"Yes, the Family Bible," the lawyer answered, gazing at it
complacently, "about which there was so much talk at the opening of
the suit. It was identified by a score of references, called for by
both sides, sought for high and low, and never produced!"

"And here it is!"

"Here it is. Apparently at some time or other it went out of fashion,
was laid aside and lost sight of, and eventually bricked up with a
mass of old and valueless papers."

Audley steadied his voice with difficulty. "And what is its effect?"
he asked.

"Its effect, my lord, is to corroborate our case in every particular,"
the lawyer answered proudly. "Its entries form a history of the family
for a long period, and amongst them is an entry of the marriage of
Peter Paravicini Audley on the date alleged by us; an entry made in
the handwriting of his father, and one of eleven made by the same
hand. This entry agrees in every particular with the suspected
statement in the register which we support, and fully bears out our
case."

"And John Audley found that?" my lord cried, after a moment of
pregnant silence. He had regained his composure. His eyes were
shining.

"Yes, and it killed him," Stubbs said gravely. "Doubtless he came on
it at the moment when he thought success was within his grasp, and the
shock was too much for him."

"Good Lord! Good Lord! And how did you get it?"

"From Mr. Basset."

"Basset?"

"Who obtained it, I have no doubt, from the man, Toft, either by
pressure or purchase."

"The rascal! The d--d rascal! He ought to be prosecuted!"

"Possibly," the lawyer agreed. "But he was only an accomplice, and we
could not prosecute him without involving others; without bringing Mr.
John's name into it--and he is dead. As a fact, I have passed my word
to Mr. Basset that no steps should be taken against him, and I think
your lordship will agree with me that I could not do otherwise."

"Still--the man ought to be punished!"

"He ought, but if any one has paid for his silence or for this book,
it is not we."

After that there was a little more talk about the Bible, which my lord
examined with curiosity, about the singularity of its discovery, about
the handwriting of the entries, which the lawyer said he could himself
prove. Stubbs was made free of the decanter, and of everything but my
lord's mind. For Audley said nothing of his engagement to Mary--the
moment was hardly opportune; and nothing--it was too late in the
day--of Toft's former exploit. He stood awhile absorbed and dreaming,
staring through the haze of the candles. Here at last was final and
complete relief. No more fears, no more calculations. Here was an end
at last of the feeling that there was a mine under him. Traditions,
when they are bred in the bone, die slowly, and many a time he had
been hard put to it to resist the belief, so long whispered, that his
branch was illegitimate. At last the tradition was dead. There was no
more need to play for safety. What he had he had, and no one could
take it from him.

And presently the talk passed to the election.

"There's no doubt," Stubbs said, "that Mr. Basset is a stronger
candidate than either side expected."

"But he's no politician! He has no experience!"

The lawyer sat forward, with his legs apart and a hand on either knee.
"No," he said. "But the truth is, though it is beyond me how a
gentleman of his birth can be so misled, he believes what he says--and
it goes down!"

"Is he a speaker?"

"He is and he isn't! I slipped in myself one night at the back of one
of the new-fangled meetings his precious League has started. I wanted
to see, my lord, if any of our people were there. I heard him for ten
minutes, and at the start he was so jumpy I thought that he would
break down. But when he got going--well, I saw how it was and what
took the people. He believes what he says, and he says it plain. The
way he painted Peel giving up everything, sacrificing himself,
sacrificing his party, sacrificing his reputation, sacrificing all to
do what he thought was right--the devil himself wouldn't have known
his own!"

"He almost converted you?"

The lawyer laughed disdainfully. "Not a jot!" he said. "But I saw that
he would convert some. Not many," Stubbs continued complacently.
"There's some that mean to, but will think better of it at the last.
And some would but daren't! Two or three may. Still, he's such a
candidate as we've not had against us before, my lord. And with cheap
bread and the preachings of this plaguy League--I shall be glad when
it is over."

Audley rose and poked the fire. "You're not going to tell me," he
said, in a voice that was unnaturally even, "that he's going to beat
us? You're not going, after all the assurances you've given me----"

"God forbid," Stubbs replied. "No, no, my lord! Mr. Mottisfont will
hold the seat! I mean only that it will be a nearer thing--a nearer
thing than it has been."

He had no idea that his patron was fighting a new spasm of anger; that
the thought that he might, after all, have dealt with Sir Robert, the
thought that he might, after all, have bargained with the party in
power, was almost too much for the other's self-command. It was too
late now, of course. It was too late. But if the contest was to be so
close, surely if he had cast his weight on the other side, he might
have carried it!

And what if the seat were lost? Then this stubborn, confident fool,
who was as bigoted in his faith as the narrowest Leaguer of them all,
had done him a deadly injury! My lord bit off an oath, and young as he
was, his face wore a very apoplectic look as he turned round, after
laying down the poker.

"That reminds me," the lawyer resumed, blandly unconscious of the
crisis, and of the other's anger. "I meant to ask your lordship what's
to be done about the two Boshams. You remember them, my lord? They've
had the small holding by the bridge with the water meadow time out of
mind--for seven generations they say. They pay eighteen pounds as
joint tenants, and have votes as old freemen."

"What of them?" the other asked impatiently.

"Well, I'm afraid they'll not support us."

"Do you mean that they'll not vote for Mottisfont?"

"I'm afraid not," Stubbs answered. "They're as stubborn as their own
pigs! I've spoken to them myself and told them that they've only one
thing to expect if they go against their landlord."

"And that is, to go out!" Audley said. "Well, make that quite clear to
them, Stubbs, and depend upon it--they'll see differently."

"I'm afraid they won't, my lord, and that is why I trouble you. They
voted against the last lord--twice, I am told--and the story goes that
he laid his stick about Ben Bosham's shoulders in the street--that
would be in '31, I fancy. But he didn't turn them out--they'd been in
the holding so long."

"Two votes may have been nothing to him," Audley replied coldly. "They
are something to me. They will vote for Mottisfont or they will go,
Stubbs. That is flat, and do you see to it. There, I'm tired now," he
continued, rising from his seat.

Stubbs rose. "I don't know if your lordship's heard about Mr. John's
will!"

"No!" My lord straightened himself. Earlier in the day he had given
some thought to this, and had weighed Mary Audley's chances of
inheriting what John Audley had. "No!" he said. And he waited.

"He has left the young lady eight thousand pounds."

"Eight thousand!" Audley ejaculated. "Do you mean--he must have had
more than that? He wasted a small fortune in that confounded suit. But
he must have had--four times that, man!"

"The residue goes to Mr. Basset."

"Basset!" Audley cried, his face flushed with passion. "To Basset?" he
repeated. "Good G--d!"

"So I'm told, my lord," the lawyer answered, staggered by the temper
in which his employer received the news.

"But Miss Audley was his own niece! Basset? He was no relation to
him!"

"They were very old friends."

"That's no reason why he should leave him thirty thousand pounds of
Audley money! Money taken straight out of the Audley property! Thirty
thousand----"

"Not thirty, my lord," Stubbs ventured. "Not much above twenty, I
should say. If you put it----"

"If I put it that you were--something of a fool at times," the angry
man cried, "I shouldn't be far wrong! But there, there, never mind!
Good-night! Can't you see I'm dead tired and hardly know what I am
saying? Come to-morrow! Come at eleven in the morning."

Stubbs hardly knew how to take it. But after a moment's hesitation, he
made the best of the apology, muttered something, and got out of the
room. On the stairs he relieved his feelings by a word or two. In the
street he wondered what had taken the man so suddenly. Surely he had
not expected to get the money!




                             CHAPTER XXX

                           A FRIEND IN NEED


Basset had obtained the missing Bible very much in the way the lawyer
had indicated--partly by purchase and partly by pressure. Shocked as
Toft had been by his master's sudden death, he had had the presence of
mind to remember that he might make something of what they had
discovered could he secrete it; and with every nerve quivering the man
had fought down panic until he had hidden the parcel which had caused
John Audley's collapse. Then he had given way. He had turned his back
on the Great House, and shuddering, clutched at by grisly hands,
pursued by phantom feet, he had fled through the night and the Yew
Walk, to hide, for the present at least, his part in the tragedy.

Basset, however, had known too much for him, and the servant, shaken
by what had happened, had not been able to persist in his denials. But
to tell and to give were two things, and it is doubtful whether he
would have released his plunder if Basset had not in the last resort
disclosed to him Miss Audley's engagement to her cousin.

The change which this news wrought in Toft had astonished Basset. The
man had gone down under it as under a blow on the head. The spirit had
gone out of him, and he had taken with thankfulness the sum which
Basset, as John Audley's representative, had offered him--rather out
of pity than because it seemed necessary. He had given up the parcel
on the night before the funeral.

The book in his hands, Basset had hastened to be rid of it. Cynically
he had told himself that he did so, lest he too might give way to the
ignoble impulse to withhold it. Audley was his rival, but that he
might have forgiven, as men forgive great wrongs and in time smile on
their enemies. But the little wrongs, who can forgive these--the
slight, the sneer, the assumption of superiority, the upper hand
lightly taken and insolently held?

Not Peter Basset, at a moment when he was being tried almost beyond
bearing. For every day, between the finding of the body and the
funeral, and often more than once in the day he had to see Mary, he
had to advise her, he had--for there was no one else--to explain
matters to her, to bear her company. He had to quit this meeting and
that Ordinary--for election business stops for no man--and to go to
her. He had to find her alone and to see her face light up at his
entrance; he had to look back, and to see her watch him as he rode
from the door. Nor when he was absent from the Gatehouse was it any
better; nay, it was worse. For then he was forced to think of her as
alone and sad, he had to picture her brooding over the fire, he had to
fancy her at her solitary meals. And alike, with her or away from her,
he had to damp down the old passion, as well as the new regret that
each day and each hour and every kind look on her part fanned into a
flame. Nor was even this all; every day he saw that she grew more
grave, daily he saw her color fading, and he did not know what qualms
she masked, what nightmares she might be suffering in that empty
house--nay, what cause for unhappiness she might be hiding. At
last--it was the afternoon before the funeral--he could bear it no
longer, and he spoke.

"You ought not to be here!" he said bluntly. "Why doesn't Audley fetch
you away?" He was standing before the fire drawing on his gloves as he
prepared to leave. The room was full of shadows, for he had chosen a
time when she could not see his face.

She tried to fence with him. "I am afraid," she said, "that some
formalities will be necessary before he can do that."

"Then why is he not here?" he retorted. "Or why doesn't he send some
one to be with you? You ought not to be alone. Mrs. Jenkinson at The
Butterflies--she's a good soul--you know her?"

"Yes."

"She'd come at a word. I know it's not my business----"

"Or you would go about it, I am sure," she replied gently, "with as
much respect to my wishes as Lord Audley shows."

"Your wishes? But why--why do you wish----"

"Why do I wish to be alone?" she answered. "Because I owe something to
my uncle. Because I owe him a little thought and some remembrance. He
made my old life for me--would you have me begin the new one before he
is in the grave? This was his house--would you have me entertain Lord
Audley in it?" She stood up, slender and straight, with the table
between them--and he did not guess that her knees were trembling.
"Please to understand," she continued, "that Lord Audley and I are
entirely at one in this. We have our lives before us, and it were
indeed selfish of us, and ungrateful of me, if we grudged a few days
to remembrance. As selfish," she continued bravely--and he did not
know that she braced herself anew--"as if I were ever to forget the
friend who was _his_ friend, whose kindness has never failed me, whose
loyalty has never--" she broke down there. She could not go on.

"Add, too," he said gruffly, "who has robbed you of the greater part
of your inheritance! Don't forget that!" He had been explaining the
effect of John Audley's will to her. It had been opened that morning.

His roughness helped her to recover herself. "I do not know what you
