mean by 'inheritance,'" she said. "My uncle has left me the portion
his wife brought to him. I am more than satisfied. I am very grateful.
My only fear is that, had he known of my engagement, he would not have
wished me to have this."

"The will was made before you came to live here," Basset said. "The
eight thousand was left to you because you were his brother's child.
It was the least he could do for you, and had he made a new will he
would doubtless have increased it. But," breaking off, "I must be
going." Yet he still stood, and he still tapped the table with the
end of his riding-crop. "When is Audley coming?" he asked suddenly.
"To-morrow?"

"Yes, to-morrow."

"Well he ought to," he replied, without looking at her. "You should
not be here a day longer by yourself. It is not fitting. I shall see
you in the morning before we start for the church, but the lawyer will
be here and I shall not be able to come again. But I must be sure that
there is some one here." He spoke almost harshly, partly to impress
her, partly to hide his own feelings; and he did not suspect that she,
too, was fighting for calmness; that she was praying that he would go,
before she showed more clearly how much the parting tried her--before
every kind word, every thoughtful act, every toilsome journey taken on
her behalf, rose to her remembrance and swept away the remnants of her
self-control.

She had not imagined that she would feel the leave-taking as she did.
She could not speak, and she was thankful that it was too dark for him
to see her face. Would he never go? And still the slow tap-tap of his
whip on the table went on. It seemed to her that she would never
forget the sound! And if he touched her----

But he had no thought of touching her.

"Good-night," he said at last. He turned, moved away, lingered. At the
door he looked back. "I am going into the library," he said. "The
coffin will be closed in the morning."

"Yes, good-night," she muttered, thankful that the thought of the dead
man steadied her and gave her power to speak. "I shall see him in the
morning."

He closed the door, and she crept blindly to a chair, and covered by
the darkness she gave way. She told herself that she was thinking of
her uncle. But she knew that she deceived herself. She knew that her
uncle had little to do with her tears, or with the feeling of
loneliness that overcame her. Once more she had lost her friend--and a
friend so good, so kind. Only now did she know his value!

Five minutes later Basset crossed the court in search of his horse.
Mrs. Toft's door stood open and a stream of firelight and candlelight
poured from it and cut the January fog. She was hard at work, cooking
funeral meats with the help of a couple of women; for quietly as John
Audley had lived, he could not be buried without some stir. Odd people
would come, drawn by the Audley name, squires who boasted some distant
connection with the line, a few who had been intimate with him in past
days. And the gentry far and wide would send their carriages, and the
servants must be fed. Still the preparations jarred on Basset as he
crossed the court. He felt the bustle an outrage on the mourning girl
he had left, and on his own depression.

Probably Mrs. Toft had set the door open that she might waylay him,
for as he went by she came out and stopped him. "Mr. Basset, sir!" she
said in a low voice. "Is this true, what Toft tells me? I declare,
when I heard it, you could ha' knocked me down with a common dip!" She
was wiping her hands on her apron. "That the young lady is to marry
his lordship?"

"I believe it is true," Basset said coldly. "But you had better let
her take her own time to make it known. Toft should not have told
you."

"Never fear, sir, I'll not let on. But, Lord's sakes, who'd ha'
thought it? And she'll be my lady! Not that she's not an Audley, and
there's small differ, and she'll make none, or I don't know her! Well,
indeed, I hope she's wise, but wedding cake, make it as rich as you
like, it's soon stale. And for him, I don't know what the Master would
have said if he'd known it! I thought things would come out," with a
quick look at Basset, "quite otherways! And wished it, too!"

"Thank you, Mrs. Toft," he said quietly.

"Just so, sir, you'll excuse me. Well, it's not many months since the
young lady came, and look at the changes! With the old Master dead,
and you going in for elections--drat 'em, I say, plaguy things that
set folks by the ears--and Mr. Colet gone and 'Truria that unsettled,
and Toft for ever wool-gathering, I shall be glad when tomorrow's over
and I can sit down and sort things out a bit!"

"Yes, Mrs. Toft."

"And speaking of elections reminds me. You know they two Boshams of
the Bridge End, sir?"

"I know them. Yes."

Mrs. Toft sniffed. "They're sort of kin to me, and middling honest as
town folks go. But two silly fellows, always meddling and making and
gandering with things they'd ought to leave to the gentry! The old
lord was soft with them, and so they've a mind now to see who is the
stronger, they or his lordship."

"If you mean that they have promised to vote for me----"

"That's it, sir! Vote their living away, they will, and leave 'em
alone! Votes are for poor men to make a bit of money by, odd times;
but they two Boshams I've no patience with. Sally, Ben's wife, was
with me to-day, and the long and the short of it is, Mr. Stubbs has
told them that if they vote for you they'll go into the street."

"It's a hard case," Basset said. "But what can I do?"

"Don't ha' their votes. What's two votes to you? For the matter of
that," Mrs. Toft continued, thoroughly wound up, "what's all the
votes--put together? Bassets and Audleys, Audleys and Bassets were
knights of the shire, time never was, as all the country knows! But
for this little borough--place it's what your great-grandfather
wouldn't ha' touched with a pair of gloves! I'd leave it to the
riff-raff that's got money and naught else, and builds Institutes and
such like!"

"But you'd like cheap bread?" Basset said, smiling.

"Bread? Law, Mr. Basset, what's elections to do wi' bread? It's not
bread they're thinking of, cheap or dear. It's beer! Swim in it they
do, more shame to you gentry! I'll be bound to say there's three goes
to bed drunk in the town these days for two that goes sober! But
there, you speak to they Boshams, Mr. Basset, sir, and put some sense
into them!"

"I'm afraid I can't promise," he answered. "I'll see!"

But it was not of the Boshams he thought as he rode down the hill with
a tight rein--for between fog and frost the road was treacherous. He
was thinking of the man who had been his friend and of whose face,
sphinx-like in death, he had taken farewell in the library. And solemn
thoughts, thoughts such as at times visit most men, calmed his spirit.
The fret of the contest, the strivings of the platform, the rubs of
vanity flitted to a distance, they became small things. Even passion
lost its fever and love its selfishness; and he thought of Audley with
patience and of Mary as he would think of her in years to come, when
time had enshrined her, and she was but a memory, one of the things
that had shaped his life. He knew, indeed, that this mood would pass;
that passion would surge up again, that love would reach out to its
object, that memory would awake and wound him, that pain and
restlessness would be his for many days. But he knew also--in this
hour of clear views--that all these things would have an end, and only
the love,


              That seeketh not itself to please
              Nor of itself hath any care,


would remain with him.

Already it had carried him some way. In the matter of the election,
indeed, he might be wrong. He might have entered on it too
hastily--often he thought that he had--he might be of fibre too weak
for the task. It cost him much to speak, and the occasional failure,
the mistake, the rebuff, worried him for hours and even days. Trifles,
too, that would not have troubled another, troubled his conscience;
side-issues that were false, but that he must not the less support,
workers whom he despised and must still use, tools that soiled his
hands but were the only tools. Then the vulgar greeting, the tipsy
grasp, the friend in the market-place:--


              The man who hails you Tom or Jack
              And proves by thumps upon your back
                  How he esteems your merit!
              Who's such a friend that one had need
              Be very much his friend indeed
                  To pardon or to bear it!


these humiliated him. But worse, far worse, than all was his unhappy
gift of seeing the merits of the other side and of doubting the cause
which he had set out to champion. He had fits of lowness when he was
tempted to deny that honesty existed anywhere in politics; when Sir
Robert Peel no less than Lord George Bentinck--who was coming to the
front as the spokesman of the land--Cobden the Radical no less than
Lord John Russell, seemed to be bent only on their own advancement,
when all, he vowed, were of the School of the Cynics!

But were he right or wrong in his venture--and right or wrong he had
small hope of winning--he would not the less cling to the thing which
Mary had given him--the will to make something of his life, the
determination that he would leave the world, were it only the few
hundred acres that he owned, or the hamlet in which he lived, better
than he had found them. The turmoil of the election over, he would
devote himself to his property at Blore. There John Audley's twenty
thousand pounds opened a wide door. He would build, drain, manure,
make roads, re-stock. He would make all things new. From him as from a
centre comfort should flow. He saw himself growing old in the middle
of his people, a lonely, but not an unhappy man.

As he passed the bridge at Riddsley he thought of the Boshams, and
weary as he was, he drew rein at their door. Ben Bosham came out,
bare-headed; a short, elderly man with a bald forehead and a dirty
complexion, a man who looked like a cobbler rather than the cow-keeper
he was.

"Shut your door, Bosham," Basset said. "I want a word with you."

And when the man had done this, he stooped from the saddle and said a
few words to him in a low voice.

"Well, I'm dommed!" the other answered, peering up through the
darkness. "It be you, Squire, bain't it? But you're not meaning it?"

"I am," Basset replied in a low voice. "I'd not say, vote for him,
Bosham. But leave it alone. You're not called upon to ruin yourself."

"But ha' you thought," the man exclaimed, "that our two votes may make
the differ? That they may make you or mar you, Squire!"

"Well, I'd rather be marred than see you put out of your place,"
Basset answered. "Think it over, Bosham."

But Bosham repudiated even thought of it. This vote and his use of it,
this defiance of a lord, was, for the time, his very life. "I'll not
do it," he declared. "I couldn't do it! Nor I won't!" he repeated.
"We're freemen o' Riddsley, and almost the last of the freemen that
has votes as freemen! And while free we are, free we'll be, and vote
as we choose, Squire! Vote as we choose! I'd not show my face in the
town else! Mr. Stubbs may talk as gallus as he likes--and main ashamed
of himself he looked yesterday--he may talk as gallus as never was,
we'll not bend to no landlord, nor to no golden image!"

"Then there's no more to be said," Basset answered, feeling that he
cut a poor figure. "I don't wish you to do anything against your
conscience, Bosham, and I'm obliged to you and your brother for your
staunchness. I only wanted you to know that I should understand if you
stayed away."

"I'd chop my foot off first!" cried the patriot.

After which Basset had no choice but to leave him and to ride on,
feeling that he was himself too soft for the business--that he was a
round man in a square hole. He wondered what his committee would think
of him if they knew, and what Bosham thought of him--who did know. For
Bosham seemed to him at this moment a man of principle, a patriot,
nay, a very Brutus: whereas, Ben was in truth no better than a small
man of large conceit, whose vote was his one road to fame.




                             CHAPTER XXXI

                              BEN BOSHAM


It was Tuesday, market-day at Riddsley, and farmers' wives, cackling
as loudly as the poultry they carried, elbowed one another on the
brick pavements or clustered before the windows of the low-browed
shops. Farmers in white great-coats, with huge handkerchiefs about
their necks, streamed from the yards of the Packhorse and the Barley
Mow, and meeting a friend planted themselves in the roadway as firmly
as if they stood in their own pastures. Now and again a young spark,
fancying all eyes upon his four-year-old, sidled through the throng
with many a "Whoa!" and "Where be'st going, lad?" While on the steps
of the Market-Cross and about the long line of carts that rested on
their shafts in the open street, hucksters chaffered and house-wives
haggled over the rare egg or the keg of salted butter.

The quacking of ducks, the neighing of horses, the singsong of rustic
voices filled the streets. It was common talk that the place was as
full as at the March Fair. The excitement of the Election had gone
abroad, the cry that the land was at stake had brought in some, others
had come to see what was afoot. Many a stout tenant was here who at
other times left the marketing to his womenfolk; and shrewd glances he
cast at the gentry, as he edged past the justices who lounged before
the Audley Arms and killed in gossip the interval between the
Magistrates' Meeting, at which they had just assisted, and the
Ordinary at which they were to support young Mottisfont.

The great men talked loudly and eagerly, were passionate, were in
earnest. Occasionally one of the younger of them would step aside to
look at a passing hackney, or an older man would speak to a favorite
tenant whom he called by his first name. But, for the most part,
they clung together, fine upstanding figures, in high-collared
riding-coats and top-boots. They were keen to a man; the farmers keen
also, but not so keen. For the argument that high wheat meant high
rents, and that most of the benefits of protection went to the
landlords had got about even in Riddsley. The squires complained that
the farmers would only wake up when it was too late!

Still in such a place, and on market-day, four out of five were in the
landed interest; four-fifths of the squires, four-fifths of the
parsons, almost four-fifths of the tenants; for the laborers, no one
asked what they thought of it--they had ten shillings a week and no
votes. "Peel--'od rot him!" cried the majority, "might shift as often
as his own spinning-jenny! But not they! No Manchester man, and no
Tamworth man either, should teach them their business! Who would die
if there were no potatoes? It was a flam, a bite, but it wouldn't
bamboozle Stafford farmers!"

Meanwhile Stubbs, moving quietly through the throng, spoke with one
here and there. He had the same word for all. "Listen to me, John," he
would say, his hand on the yeoman's shoulder. "Peel says he's been
wrong all these years and is only right now. Then, if you believe him,
he's a fool; and if you don't believe him, he's a knave. Not a very
good vet., John, eh? Not the vet. for the old gray mare, eh?"

This had a great effect. John went away and repeated it to himself,
and presently grasped the dilemma and chuckled over it. Ten minutes
later he imparted it, with the air of a Solomon, to the "Duke," who
mouthed it and liked it and rolled it off to the first he met. It went
the round of the inns and about four o'clock a farmer fresh from the
"tap" put it to Stubbs and convinced him; and that night men,
travelling home market-peart in the charge of their wives, bore it to
many a snug homestead set in orchards of hard cider apples.

Had the issue of the Election lain with the Market, indeed, it had
been over. But of the hundred and ninety voters no more than fifteen
were farmers, and though the main trade of the town sided with them,
the two factories were in opposition; and cheap bread had its charms
for the lesser fry. But the free traders were too wise to flaunt their
views on market-day, and it was left for little Ben Bosham, whose vote
was pretty near his all, to distinguish himself in the matter.

He, too, had been at the tap, and about noon his voice was heard
issuing from a group who stood near the Audley Arms. "Be I free, or
bain't I?" he bawled. "Answer me that, Mr. Bagenal!"

A knot of farmers had edged him into a corner and were disposed to
bait him. A stubby figure in a velveteen coat and drab breeches, his
hand on an ash-plant, he held his ground among them, tickled by the
attention he excited and fired by his own importance. "Be I free, or
bain't I?" he repeated.

"Free?" Bagenal answered contemptuously. "You be free to make a fool
of yourself, Ben! I'm thinking you'd ha' us all lay down the ground to
lazy pasture and live by milk, as you do!"

"Milk?" ejaculated a stout man of many acres, whose contempt for such
traffic was above speech.

"You'll be free to go out of Bridge End," cried a third. "That's what
you'll be free to do! And where'll your vote be then, Ben?"

But there Bosham was sure of himself. "That's where you be wrong, Mr.
Willet," he retorted with gusto. "My vote dunno come o' my landlord,
and in the Bridge End or out of the Bridge End, I've a vote while I've
a breath! 'Tain't the landlord's vote, and why'd I give it to he? Free
I be--not like you, begging your pardon! Freeman, old freeman, I be,
of this borough! Freeman by marriage!"

"Then you be a very rare thing!" Bagenal retorted slyly. "There's a
many lose their freedom that way, but you be the first I ever heard of
that got it!"

"And a hard bargain, too, as I hear," said Willet.

This drew a roar of laughter. The crowd grew thicker and the little
man's temper grew short, for his wife was no beauty. He began to see
that they were playing with him.

"You leave me alone, Mr. Willet," he said angrily, "and I'll leave you
alone!"

"Leave thee alone!" said the farmer who had turned up his nose at
milk. "So I would, same as any other lump o' dirt! But yo' don't let
us. Yo' set up to know more than your betters! Pity the old lord ain't
alive to put his stick about your back!"

"Did it smart, Ben?" cried a lad who had poked himself in between his
betters.

"You let me catch you," Ben cried, "and I'll make you smart. You be
all a set of slaves! You'd set your thatch afire if squires'd tell
you! Set o' slaves, set o' slaves you be!"

"And what be you, Bosham?" said a man who had just joined the group.
"Head of the men, bain't you? Cheap bread and high wages, that's your
line, ain't it!"

"That's his line, be it?" said the old farmer slowly. "Bit of a rascal
it seems yo' be? Don't yo' let me find you in my boosey pasture
talking to no men o' mine, or I'll make yo' smart a sight more than
his lordship did!"

"Ay, that's Ben's line," said the new-comer.

"You're a liar!" Ben shrieked. "A dommed liar you be! I see you not
half an hour agone coming out of Stubbs's office! I know who told you
to say that, you varmint! I'll have the law of you!"

"Ben Bosham, the laborers' friend!" the man retorted.

Ben was furious, for he was frightened. There was no feud so bitter in
the 'forties as the feud between farmer and laborer. The laborer had
no vote, he had lost his common rights, his wood, his cow-feed; he was
famished, he was crushed by the new Poor Law, and so he was often in
an ugly mood, as singed barns and burning stacks went to show. Bosham
knew that he might flout the squires, and at worst be turned out of
his holding; but woe betide him if he got the name of the laborers'
friend. Moreover, there was just so much truth in the accusation as
made it dangerous. Ben and his brother eked out the profits of the
dairy by occasional labor, and Ben had sometimes vapored in tap-rooms
where he had better have held his tongue. He shrieked furiously,
therefore, at the false witness, and even tried to reach him with his
ash-plant. "Who be you?" he screamed. "You be a lawyer's pup, you be!
You'd ruin me, you would! Let me get a hold of you and I'll put a mark
on you! You be lying!"

"I don't know about that," said the big farmer slowly and weightily.
"I'm feared yo're a bit of a rascal, Ben."

"Ay, and fine he'll look in front of Stafford Gaol some morning!" said
Willet. "At the end of a rope."

On that in a happy moment for Ben, while he gaped for a retort and
found none, two carriers' vans, huge wooden vehicles festooned with
rabbits and market-baskets and drawn by three horses abreast, lumbered
through the crowd and scattered it. In a twinkling Ben was left alone,
an angry man, aware that he had cut but a poor figure!

He had been frightened, too, and he resented it. He thirsted for some
chance of setting himself right, of proving to others that he was a
freeman and not as other men. And in the nick of time he saw a
chance--if only he had the courage to rise to it. He saw moving
towards him through the press a mail-phaeton and pair. On the box,
caped and gloved, the pink of fashion, sat no less a person than his
lordship himself. A servant in the well-known livery, a white coat
with a blue collar, sat behind him.

The vans which had freed Ben blocked the great man's way, and he was
moving at a walk. All heads were bared as he passed, and he was
acknowledging the courtesy with his whip when Ben stepped before the
horses and lifted his hand. In an instant a hundred eyes were on the
man and he knew that he had burned his boats. Bravado was now his only
chance.

"My lord," he cried, waving his hat impudently. "I want to know what
you be going to do about me?"

My lord hardly caught his words and did not catch his meaning, but he
saw that the man was almost under the horses' feet and he checked
them. Ben stood aside then but, as the carriage passed him, he laid
his hand on the splashboard and walked beside it. He looked up at the
great man and in the same impudent tone, "Be you agoing to turn me
out, my lord?" he cried. "That's what I want to know."

"I don't understand you," Audley said coldly. He guessed that the man
referred to the Election, and what was the use of understrappers like
Stubbs if he was to be exposed to this?

"I'm Ben Bosham of the Bridge End, my lord, that's who I be," Ben
replied brazenly. "I'm not ashamed of my name. I want to know whether
you be agoing to turn me out, and my wife and my child! That's what I
want to----"

Then a farmer seized him and dragged him back, and others laid hands
on him, though he still shouted. "Dunno be a fool!" cried the farmer,
deeply shocked. "Drive on, drive on, my lord! Never heed him. He've
had a glass too much!"

"Packhorse beer, my lord," explained a second in stentorian
tones--though he knew that Ben was fairly sober. "Ought to be ashamed
of himself!" cried a third, and he shook the aggressor. Ben was in a
minority of one, and those who held him were inclined to be rough.

Audley waved his whip good-humoredly. "Take care of him!" he said.
"Don't hurt him!" And he drove on, outwardly unmoved though inwardly
fuming. Still had it ended there little harm would have been done. But
word of the brawl outran the carriage and, as it chanced, reached the
door of Hatton's Works as the men came out to dinner. Ben Bosham had
spoken his mind to his lordship! His lordship had driven over him! The
farmers had beaten him! The news passed from one to another like
flame, and the hands stood, some two score of them, and hooted my lord
loudly, shouting "Shame!" and jeering at him.

Now had Audley been the candidate he would have thought nothing of it.
He would have laughed in the men's faces and taken it as part of the
day's work; or had he been the old lord, he would have flung a curse
at the men and cut at the nearest with his whip--and forgotten it.

But he was not the old lord, times were changed, and the thing angered
him. It was in an ill-temper that he drove on along the road that rose
by gentle degrees to the Great Chase.

For the matter of that, he had been in a black mood for some time,
because he could not make up his mind. Night and morning ambition
whispered to him to put the vessel about; to steer the course which
experience told him that it behooved a man to steer who was not
steeped in romance, nor too greedy for the moment's enjoyment; the
course which, beyond all doubt, he would have steered were he now
starting!

But he was not starting; and when he thought of shifting the helm he
foresaw difficulties. He did not think that he was a soft-hearted man,
yet he feared that when it came to the point he would flinch. Besides,
he told himself that he was a man of honor; and the change was a
little at odds with this. But there again, he reflected that truth was
honor and in the end would cause less pain.

Eight thousand pounds was so very small a portion! And for safety, he
no longer needed to play for it. John Audley was dead and the Bible
was in his hands; his case was beyond cavil or question, while the
political situation was such that he saw no opening, no chance of
enrichment in that direction. To make Mary, handsome, good, attractive
as she was--to make her the wife of a poor peer, of a discontented,
dissatisfied man--this, if he could only find it in his heart to tell
her the truth, would be a cruel kindness.

As he drove along the road, angry with the wretched Bosham, angry with
Stubbs, angry with the fools who had hooted him, he was not sorry to
feel his ill-temper increase. He might not find it so difficult to
speak to her. A little effort and the thing would be done. Eight
thousand pounds? The interest would barely dress her. Whereas, if she
had played her cards well and been heir to her uncle's thirty
thousand--the case would have been different. After all, the fault lay
with her.

He roused the off-horse with a sharp cut, and a moment later discerned
at the end of a long, straight piece of road, the moss-clad steps of
the old Cross and standing beside them a figure he knew.

He was moved, even while, in his irritation, he was annoyed that she
had come to meet him at a place that had recollections for him. It
seemed to him that in doing this she was putting an undue, an unfair
burden on him.

She waved her hand and he raised his hat. The day was bright and cold,
and the east wind had whipped a fine color into her cheeks. Perhaps
that, too, was unfair. Perhaps that too was putting an undue burden on
him.




                            CHAPTER XXXII

                        MARY MAKES A DISCOVERY


But his face was not one to betray his thoughts, and as he drew up
beside Mary, horses fretting, polechains jingling, the silver of the
harness glittering from a score of points, he made a gallant show. The
most eager lover, Apollo himself in the chariot of the sun, had
scarcely made a better approach to his mistress, had hardly carried it
more finely over a mind open to appearances.

With a very fair show of haste he bade his man take the reins, and as
the servant swung himself into the front seat the master sprang to the
ground. His hand met Mary's, his curly-brimmed hat was doffed, his
eyes smiled into hers. "Well, better late than never!" he said.

"Yes," she answered. But she spoke more soberly than he expected and
her face was grave. "You have been a long time away."

That was their meeting. The servant was there; under his eyes it could
not be warmer. Whether one or the other had foreseen this need not be
asked.

He spoke to the man, who, possessed by a natural curiosity, was all
ears. "Keep them moving," he said. "Drive back a mile or two and
return." Then to Mary, his hat still in his hand, "A long time away?
Longer than I expected, and far longer than I hoped, Mary. Shall we go
up the hill a little?"

"I thought you would propose that," she said. "I am so glad that it is
fine."

The man had turned the horses. Audley took her hand again and pressed
it, looking in her face, telling himself that she grew more handsome
every day. Why hadn't she thirty thousand pounds? Aloud he said, "So
am I, very glad. Otherwise you could not have met me, and I fancied
that you might not wish me to come to the house? Was that so, dear?"

"I think it was," she said. "He has been gone so very short a time.
Perhaps it was foolish of me."

"Not at all!" he answered, admiring the purity of her complexion. "It
was like you."

"If we had told him, it would have been different."

"On the other hand," he said deftly, as he drew her hand through his
arm, "it might have troubled his last days? And now, tell me all,
Mary, from the beginning. You have gone through dark days and I have
not been--I could not be with you. But I want to share them."

She told the story of John Audley's disappearance, her cheeks growing
pale as she described the alarm, the search, the approach of night and
her anguish at the thought that her uncle might be lying in some place
which they had overlooked! Then she told him of Basset's arrival, of
the discovery, of the manner in which Peter had arranged everything
and saved her in every way. It seemed to her that to omit this, to say
nothing of him, would be as unfair to the one as uncandid to the
other.

My lord's comment was cordial, yet it jarred on her. "Well done!" he
said. "He was made to be of use, poor chap! If it were any one else I
should be jealous of him!" And he laughed, pressing her arm to his
side.

She was quivering with the memories which her story had called up, and
it was only by an effort that she checked the impulse to withdraw her
hand. "Had you been there----"

"I hope I should have done as much," he replied complacently. "But it
was impossible."

"Yes," she said. And though she knew that her tone was cold, she could
not help it. For many, many times during the last month she had
pondered over his long absence and the chill of his letters. Many
times she had told herself that he was treating her with scant
affection, scant confidence, almost with scant respect. But then again
she had reflected that she must be mistaken, that she brought him
nothing but herself, and that if he did not love her he would not have
sought her. And telling herself that she expected too much of love,
too much of her lover, she had schooled herself to be patient, and had
resolved that not a word of complaint should pass her lips.

But to assume a warmth which she did not feel was another matter. This
was beyond her.

He, for his part, set down her manner to a natural depression. "Poor
child!" he said, "you have had a sad time. Well, we must make up for
it. As soon as we can make arrangements you must leave that gloomy
house where everything reminds you of your uncle and--and we must make
a fresh start. Do you know where I am taking you?"

She saw that they had turned off the road and were following a track
that scrambled upwards through the scrub that clothed the slope below
the Gatehouse. It slanted in the direction of the Great House. "Not to
Beaudelays?" she said.

"Yes--to Beaudelays. But don't be afraid. Not to the house."

"Oh no!" she cried. "I don't think I could bear to go there to-day!"

"I know. But I want you to see the gardens. I want you to see what
might have been ours, what we might have enjoyed had fortune been more
kind to us! Had we been rich, Mary! It is hard to believe that you
have never seen even the outside of the Great House."

"I have never been beyond the Iron Gate."

"And all these months within a mile!"

"All these months within a mile. But he did not wish it. It was one of
the first things he made me understand."

"Ah! Well, there is an end of that!" And again so matter-of-fact was
his tone that she had to struggle against the impulse to withdraw her
arm. "Now, if there is any one who has a right to be there, it is you!
And I want to be the one to take you there. I want you to see for
yourself that it is only fallen grandeur that you are marrying, Mary,
the thing that has been, not the thing that is. By G--d! I don't know
that there is a creature in the world--certainly there is none in my
world--more to be pitied than a poor peer!"

"That's nothing to me," she said. And, indeed, his words had brought
him nearer to her than anything he had said. So that when, taking
advantage of the undergrowth which hid them from the road below, he
put his arm about her and assisted her in her climb, she yielded
readily. "To think," he said, "that you have never seen this place! I
wonder that after we parted you did not go the very next morning to
visit it!"

"Perhaps I wished to be taken there by you."

"By Jove! Do you know that that is the most lover-like thing you have
said."

"I may improve with practice," she rejoined. "Indeed, it is possible,"
she continued demurely, "that we both need practice!"

She had not a notion that he was in two minds; that one half of him
was revelling in the hour, pleased with possession, enjoying her
beauty, dwelling on the dainty curves of her figure, while the other
uncertain, wavering, was asking continually, "Shall I or shall I not?"
But if she did not guess thoughts to which she had no clue he was
sharp enough to understand hers. "Ah! you are there, are you?" he
said. "Wait! Presently, when we are out of sight of that cursed
road----"

"I didn't find fault!"

On that there was a little banter between them, gallant and smiling on
his part, playful and defensive on hers, which lasted until they
reached a door leading into the lower garden. It was a rusty,
damp-stained door, once painted green, and masked by trees somewhat
higher than the underwood through which they had climbed. Ivy hung
from the wall above it, rank grass grew against it, the air about
it was dank, and in summer sent up the smell of wild leeks. Once
under-gardeners had used it to come and go, and many a time on moonlit
nights maids had stolen through it to meet their lovers in the coppice
or on the road.

Audley had brought the key and he set it in the lock and turned it.
But he did not open the door. Instead, he turned to Mary with a smile.
"This is my surprise," he said. "Shut your eyes and open them when I
tell you. I will guide you."

She complied without suspicion, and heard the door squeak on its rusty
hinges. Guided by his hand she advanced three or four paces. She heard
the door close behind her. He put his arm round her and drew her on.
"Now?" she asked, "May I look?"

"Yes, now!" he answered. As he spoke he drew her to him, and, before
she knew what to expect, he had crushed her to his breast and was
pressing kisses on her face and lips.

She was taken by surprise and so completely, that for a moment she was
helpless, without defence. Then the instinctive impulse to resist
overcame her, and she struggled fiercely; and, presently, she released
herself. "Oh, you shouldn't have done it!" she cried. "You shouldn't
have done it!"

"My darling!"

"You--you hurt me!" she panted, her breath coming short and quick. She
was as red now as she had for a moment been white. Her lips trembled,
and there were tears in her eyes. He thought that he had been too
rough with her, and though he did not understand, he stayed his
impulse to seize her again. Instead, he stood looking down at her, a
little put out.

She tried to smile, tried bravely to pass it off; but she was put to
it, he could see, not to burst into tears. "Perhaps I am foolish," she
faltered, "but please don't do it again."

"I can't promise--for always," he answered, smiling. But, none
the less, he was piqued. What a prude the girl was! What a
Sainte-ni-touche! To make such a fuss about a few kisses!

She tried to take the same tone. "I know I am silly," she said, "but
you took me by surprise."

"You were very innocent, then, my dear. Still, I'll be good, and next
time I will give you warning. Now, don't be afraid, take my arm, and
let us----"

"If I could sit down?" she murmured. Then he saw that the color had
again left her cheeks.

There was an old wheelbarrow inside the door, half full of dead
leaves. He swept it clear, and she sat down on the edge of it. He
stood by her, puzzled, and at a loss.

Certainly he had played a trick on her, and he had been a little rough
because he had felt her impulse to resist. But she must have known
that he would kiss her sooner or later. And she was no child. Her
convent days were not of yesterday. She was a woman. He did not
understand it.

Alas, she did understand it. It was not her lover's kisses, it was not
his passion or his roughness that had shaken Mary. She was not a prude
and she was a woman. That which had overwhelmed her was the knowledge,
the certainty forced on her by his embrace, that she did not love him!
That, however much she might have deluded herself a few weeks earlier,
however far she might have let the lure of love mislead her, she did
not love this man! And she was betrothed to him, she was promised to
him, she was his! On her engagement to him, on her future with him had
been based--a moment before--all her plans and all her hopes for the
future.

No wonder that the color was struck from her face, that she was shaken
to the depths of her being. For, indeed, she knew something more--that
she had had her warning and had closed her eyes to it. That evening,
when she had heard Basset's step come through the hall, that moment
when his presence had lifted the burden of suspense from her, should
have made her wise. And for an instant the veil had been lifted, and
she had been alarmed. But she reflected that the passing doubt was due
to her lover's absence and his coldness; and she had put the doubt
from her. When Audley returned all would be well, she would feel as
before. She was hipped and lonely and the other was kind to her--that
was all!

Now she knew that that was not all. She did not love Audley and she
did love some one else. And it was too late. She had misled herself,
she had misled the man who loved her, she had misled that other whom
she loved. And it was too late!

For a time that was short, yet seemed long to her companion, who stood
watching her, she sat lost in thought and unconscious of his presence.
At length he could bear it no longer. Pale cheeks and dull eyes had no
charm for him! He had not come, he had not met her, for this.

"Come!" he said, "come, Mary, you will catch cold sitting there! One
might suppose I was an ogre!"

She smiled wanly. "Oh no!" she said, "It is I--who am foolish. Please
forgive me."

"If you would like to go back?"

But her ear detected temper in his tone, and with a newborn fear of
him she hastened to appease him. "Oh no!" she said. "You were going to
show me the gardens!"

"Such as they are. Well, so you will see what there is to be seen. It
is a sorry sight, I can tell you." She rose and, taking her arm, he
led her some fifty yards along the alley in which they were, then,
turning to the right, he stopped. "There," he said. "What do you think
of it?"

They had before them the long, dank, weed-grown walk, broken midway by
the cracked fountain and closed at the far end by the broad flight of
broken steps that led upward to the terrace and so to the great lawn.
When Audley had last stood on this spot the luxuriance of autumn had
clothed the neglected beds. A tangle of vegetation, covering every
foot of soil with leaf and bloom, had veiled the progress of neglect.
Now, as by magic, all was changed. The sun still shone, but coldly and
on a bald scene. The roses that had run riot, the spires of hollyhocks
that had risen above them, the sunflowers that had struggled with the
encroaching elder, nay, the very bindweed that had strangled all alike
in its green embrace, were gone, or only reared naked stems to the
cold sky. Gone, too, were the Old Man, the Sweet William, the St.
John's Wort, the wilderness of humbler growths that had pressed about
their feet; and from the bare earth and leafless branches, the
fountain and the sundial alone, like mourners over fallen grandeur,
lifted gray heads.

There is no garden that has not its sad season, its days of stillness
and mourning, but this garden was sordid as well as sad. Its dead lay
unburied.

Involuntarily Mary spoke. "Oh, it is terrible!" she cried.

"It is terrible," he answered gloomily.

Then she feared that, preoccupied as she was with other thoughts, she
had hurt him. She was trying to think of something to comfort him,
when he repeated, "It is terrible! But, d--n it, let us see the rest
of it! We've come here for that! Let us see it!"

Together they went slowly along the walk. They came by and by to the
sundial. She hung a moment, wishing to read the inscription, but he
would not stay. "It's the old story," he said. "We are gay fellows in
the sunshine, but in the shadow--we are moths."

He did not explain his meaning. He drew her on. They mounted the wide
flight which had once, flanked by urns and nymphs and hot with summer
sunshine, echoed the tread of red-heeled shoes and the ring of spurs.
Now, elder grew between the shattered steps, weeds clothed them, the
nymphs mouldered, lacking arms and heads, the urns gaped.

Mary felt his depression and would have comforted him, but her brain
was numbed by the discovery which she had made; she was unable to
think, without power to help. She shared, she more than shared, his
depression. And it was not until they had surmounted the last flight
and stood gazing on the Great House that she found her voice. Then, as
the length and vastness of the pile broke upon her, she caught her
breath. "Oh," she cried. "It is immense!"

"It's a nightmare," he replied. "That is Beaudelays! That is," with
bitterness, "the splendid seat of Philip, fourteenth Lord Audley--and
a millstone about his neck! It is well, my dear, that you should see
it! It is well that you should know what is before you! You see your
home! And what you are marrying--if you think it worth while!"

If she had loved him she would have been strong to comfort him. If she
had even fancied that she loved him, she would have known what to
answer. As it was, she was dumb; she scarcely took in the significance
of his words. Her mind--so much of it as she could divert from
herself--was engaged with the sight before her, with the long rows of
blank and boarded windows, the smokeless chimneys, the raw, unfinished
air that, after eighty years, betrayed that this had never been a
home, had never opened its doors to happy brides, nor heard the voices
of children.

At last she spoke. "And this is Beaudelays?" she said.

"This is my home," he replied. "That's the place I've come to own!
It's a pleasant possession! It promises a cheerful homecoming, doesn't
it?"

"Have you never thought of--of doing anything to it?" she asked
timidly.

"Do you mean--have I thought of completing it? Of repairing it?"

"I suppose I meant that," she replied.

"I might as well think," he retorted, "of repairing the Tower of
London! All I have in the world wouldn't do it! And I cannot pull it
down. If I did, the lawyers first and the housebreakers afterwards,
would pull down all I have with it! There is no escape, my dear," he
continued slowly. "Once I thought there was. I had my dream. I've
stood on this lawn on summer days and I've told myself that I would
build it up again, and that the name of Audley should not be lost. But
I am a peer, what can I do? I cannot trade, I cannot plead. For a peer
there is but one way--marriage. And there were times when I had
visions of repairing the breach--in that way; when I thought that I
could set the old name first and my pleasure second; when I dreamed of
marrying a great dowry that should restore us to the place we once
enjoyed. But--that is over! That is over," he repeated in a sinking
voice. "I had to choose between prosperity and happiness; I made my
choice. God grant that we may never repent it!"

He sank into silence, waiting for her to speak; he waited with
exasperation. She did not, and he looked down at her. Then, "I
believe," he said, "that you have not heard a word I have said!"

She glanced up, startled. "I am afraid I have not," she answered
meekly. "Please forgive me. I was thinking of my uncle, and wondering
where he died."

It was all that Audley could do to check the oath that rose to his
lips. For he had spoken with intention; he had given her, as he
thought, a lead, an opening; and he had wasted his pains. He could
hardly believe that she had not heard. He could almost believe that
she was playing with him. But in truth she had barely recovered from
the shock of her discovery, and the thing before her eyes--the
house--held her attention.

"I believe that you think more of your uncle than of me!" he cried.

"No," she replied, "but he is gone and I have you." She was beginning
to be afraid of him; afraid of him, because she felt that she was in
fault.

"Yes," he replied. "But you must be more kind to me--or I don't know
that you will keep me."

She thought that he spoke in jest, and she pressed his arm.

"You don't want to go into the house?"

"Oh no! I could not bear it to-day."

"Then you must not mind if I leave you for a moment. I have to look to
something inside. I shall not be more than five minutes. Will you walk
up and down?"

She assented, thankful to be alone with her thoughts; and he left her.
A burly, stately figure, he passed across the lawn and disappeared
round the corner of the old wing where the yew trees grew close to
the walls. He let himself into the house. He wished to examine the
strong-room for himself and to see what traces were left of the
tragedy which had taken place there.

But when he stood inside and felt the icy chill of the house, where
each footstep awoke echoes, and a ghostly tread seemed to follow him,
he went no farther than the shadowy drawing-room with its mouldering
furniture and fallen screen. There, placing himself before an
unshuttered pane, he stood some minutes without moving, his hands
resting on the head of his cane, his eyes fixed on Mary. The girl was
slowly pacing the length of the terrace, her head bent.

Whether the lonely figure, with its suggestion of sadness, made its
appeal, or the attraction of a grace that no depression could mar,
overcame the dictates of prudence, he hesitated. At last, "I can't do
it!" he muttered, "hanged if I can! I suppose I ought not to have
kissed her if I meant to do it to-day. No, I can't do it."

And when, half an hour later, he parted from her at the old Cross at
the foot of the hill, he had not done it.




                            CHAPTER XXXIII

                      THE MEETING AT THE MAYPOLE


Within twenty-four hours there were signs that Bosham's brush with his
lordship and the show of feeling outside Hatton's Works had set a
sharper edge on the fight. Trifles as these were, the farmers about
Riddsley took them up and resented them. The feudal feeling was not
quite extinct. Their landlord was still a great man to them, and even
those who did not love him believed that he was fighting their battle.
An insult to him seemed, in any case, a portent, but that such a poor
creature as Bosham--Ben Bosham of the Bridge End--should insult him,
went beyond bearing.

Moreover, it was beginning to be whispered that Ben was tampering with
the laborers. One heard that he was preaching higher wages in the
public houses, another that he was asking Hodge what he got out of
dear bread, a third that he was vaporing about commons and enclosures.
The farmers growled. The farmers' sons began to talk together outside
the village inn. The farmers' wives foresaw rick-burning, maimed
cattle, and empty hen coops, and said that they could not sleep in
their beds for Ben.

Meanwhile those who, perhaps, knew something of the origin of these
rumors, and could size up the Boshams to a pound, were not unwilling
to push the matter farther. Men who fancied with Stubbs that repeal of
the corn-taxes meant the ruin of the country-side, were too much in
earnest to pick and choose. They believed that this was a fight
between the wholesome country and the black, sweating town, between
the open life of the fields and the tyranny of mill and pit; and that
the only aim of the repealer was to lower wages, and so to swell the
profits that already enabled him to outshine the lords of the soil.
They were prone, therefore, to think that any stick was good enough to
beat so bad a dog, and if the stout arms of the farmers could redress
the balance, they were in no mood to refuse their help.

Nor were sharpeners wanting on the other side. The methods of the
League were brought into play. Women were sent out to sing through the
streets of an evening, and the townsfolk ate their muffins to the
doleful strains of:


                     Child, is thy father dead?
                       Father is gone.
                     Why did they tax his bread?
                       God's will be done!


And as there were enthusiasts on this side, too, who saw the work of
the Corn Laws in the thin cheeks of children and the coffins of babes,
the claims of John Barley-corn, roared from the windows of the
Portcullis and the Packhorse, did not seem a convincing answer. A big
loaf and a little loaf, carried high through the streets, made a wide
appeal to non-voters; and a banner with, "You be taxing, we be
starving!" had its success. Then, on the evening of the market-day, a
band of Hatton's men, fresh from the Three Tailors, came to blows with
a market-peart farmer, and a "hand" was not only knocked down, but
locked up. Hatton's and Banfield's men were fired with indignation at
this injustice, and Hatton himself said a little more at the Institute
than Basset thought prudent.

These things had their effect, and more, perhaps, than was expected.
For Stubbs, going back to his office one afternoon, suffered an
unpleasant shock. Bosham's impudence had not moved him, nor the jeers
of Hatton's men. But this turned out to be another matter.
Farthingale, the shabby clerk with the high-bred nose, had news for
him which he kept until the office door was locked. And the news was
so bad that Stubbs stood aghast.

"What? All nine?" he cried. "Impossible, man! The woman's made a fool
of you!"

But Farthingale merely looked at him over his steel-rimmed spectacles.
"It's true," he said.

"I'll never believe it!" cried the lawyer.

Farthingale shook his head. "That won't alter it," he said patiently.
"It's true."

"Dyas the butcher! Why, he served me for years! For years! I go to him
at times now."

"Only for veal," replied the clerk, who knew everything "Pitt, of the
sausage shop, and Badger, the tripeman, are in his pocket--buy his
offal. With the other six, it's mainly the big loaf--Lake has a sister
with seven children, and Thomas a father in the almshouse. Two more
have big families, and the women have got hold of them!"

"But they've always voted right!" Stubbs urged, with a sinking heart.
"What's taken them?"

"If you ask me," the clerk answered, "I should say it was partly
Squire Basset--he talks straight and it takes. And partly the split.
When a party splits you can't expect to keep all. I doubted Dyas from
the first. He's the head. They were all at his house last night and a
prime supper he gave them."

Stubbs groaned. At last, "How much?" he asked.

Farthingale shook his head. "Nix," he said. "You may be shaking Dyas's
hand and find it's Hatton's. If you take my advice, you'll leave it
alone."

"Well," the lawyer cried, "of all the d--d ingratitude I ever heard
of! The money Dyas has had from me!"

Farthingale's lips framed the words "only veal," but no sound came.
Devoted as he was to his employer, he was enjoying himself. Election
times were meat and drink--especially drink--to him. At such times his
normal wage was royally swollen by Election extras, such as: "To
addressing one hundred circulars, one guinea. To folding and closing
the same, half a guinea. To watering the same, half a guinea. To
posting the same, half a guinea." A whole year's score, chalked up
behind the door at the Portcullis, vanished as by magic at this
season.

And then he loved the importance of it, and the secrecy, and the
confidence that was placed in him and might safely be placed. The
shabby clerk who had greased many a palm was himself above bribes.

But Stubbs was aghast. Scarcely could he keep panic at bay. He had
staked his reputation for sagacity on the result. He had made himself
answerable for success, to his lordship, to the candidate, to the
party. Not once, but twice, he had declared in secret council that
defeat was impossible--impossible! Had he not done so, the contest,
which his own side had invited, might have been avoided.

And then, too, his heart was in the matter. He honestly believed that
these poor creatures, these weaklings whose defection might cost so
much, were voting for the ruin of their children, for the
impoverishment of the town. They would live to see the land pass into
the hands of men who would live on it, not by it. They would live to
see the farmers bankrupt, the country undersold, the town a desert!

The lawyer had counted on a safe majority of twenty-two on a register
of a hundred and ninety voters. And twenty-two had seemed a buckler,
sufficient against all the shafts and all the spite of fortune. But a
majority of four--for that was all that remained if these nine went
over--a majority of four was a thing to pale the cheek. Perspiration
stood on his brow as he thought of it. His hand shook as he shuffled
the papers on his desk, looking for he knew not what. For a moment he
could not face even Farthingale, he could not command his eye or his
voice.

At last, "Who could get at Dyas?" he muttered.

Farthingale pondered for a time, but shook his head. "No one," he
said. "You might try Hayward if you like. They deal."

"What's to be done, then?"

"There's only one way that I can think of," the clerk replied, his
eyes on his master's face. "Rattle them! Set the farmers on them! Show
them that what they're doing will be taken ill. Show 'em we're in
earnest. Badger's a poor creature and Thomas's wife's never off the
twitter. I'd try it, if I were you. You'd pull some back."

They talked for a time in low voices and before he went into the
Portcullis that night Farthingale ordered a gig to be ready at
daylight.

It might have been thought that with this unexpected gain, Basset
would be in clover. But he, too, had his troubles and vexations. John
Audley's death and Mary's loneliness had made drafts on his time as
well as on his heart. For a week he had almost withdrawn from the
contest, and when he returned to it it was to find that the extreme
men--as is the way of extreme men--had been active. In his address and
in his speeches he had declared himself a follower of Peel. He had
posed as ready to take off the corn-tax to meet an emergency, but not
as convinced that free trade was always and everywhere right. He had
striven to keep the question of Irish famine to the front, and had
constantly stated that that which moved his mind was the impossibility
of taxing food in one part of the country while starvation reigned in
another. Above all, he had tried to convey to his hearers his notion
of Peel. He had pictured the statesman's dilemma as facts began to
coerce him. He had showed that in the same position many would have
preferred party to country and consistency to patriotism. He had
painted the struggle which had taken place in the proud man's mind. He
had praised the decision to which Peel had come, to sacrifice his
name, his credit, and his popularity to his country's good.

But when Basset returned to his Committee Room, he found that the men
to whom Free Trade was the whole truth, and to whom nothing else was
the truth, had stolen a march on him. They had said much which he
would not have said. They had set up Cobden where he had set up Peel.
To crown all, they had arranged an open-air meeting, and invited a man
from Lancashire--whose name was a red rag to the Tories--to speak at
it.

Basset was angry, but he could do nothing. He had an equal distaste
for the man and the meeting, but his supporters, elated by their
prospects, were neither to coax nor hold. For a few hours he thought
of retiring. But to do so at the eleventh hour would not only expose
him to obloquy and injure the cause, but it would condemn him to an
inaction from which he shrank.

For all that he had seen of Mary, and all that he had done for her,
had left him only the more restless and more unhappy. To one in such a
mood success, which began to seem possible, promised something--a new
sphere, new interests, new friends. In the hurly-burly of the House
and amid the press of business, the wound that pained him would heal
more quickly than in the retirement of Blore; where the evenings would
be long and lonely, and many a time Mary's image would sit beside his
fire and regret would gnaw at his heart.

The open-air meeting was to be held at the Maypole, in the wide street
bordered by quaint cottages, that served the town for a cattle-market.
The day turned out to be mild for the season, the meeting was a
novelty, and a few minutes before three the Committee began to
assemble in strength at the Institute, which stood no more than a
hundred yards from the Maypole, but in another street. Hatton was
entertaining Brierly, the speaker from Lancashire, and in making him
known to the candidate, betrayed a little too plainly that he thought
that he had scored a point.

"You'll see something new now, sir," he said, rubbing his hands.
"What's wanting, he'll win! He's addressed as many as four thousand
persons at one time, Mr. Brierly has!"

"Ay, and not such as are here, Squire," Brierly boomed. He was a tall,
bulky man with an immense chin, who moved his whole body when he
turned his head. "Not country clods, but Lancashire men! No throwing
dust i' their eyes!"

"Still, I hope you'll deal with us gently," Basset said. "Strong meat,
Mr. Brierly, is not for babes. We must walk before we can run."

"Nay, but the emptier the stomach, the more need o' meat!" Brierly
replied, and he rumbled with laughter. "An' a bellyful I'll give them!
Truth's truth and I'm no liar!"

"But to different minds the same words do not convey the same thing,"
Basset urged.

The man stared over his stiff neck-cloth. "That'ud not go down i'
Todmorden," he said. "Nor i' Burnley nor i' Bolton! We're down-right
chaps up North, and none for chopping words. Hands off the hands'
loaf, is Lancashire gospel, and we're out to preach it! We're out to
preach it, and them that clems folk and fats pheasants may make what
mouth o'er it they like!"

Fortunately the order to start came at this moment, and Basset had to
fall in and move forward with Hatton, the chairman of the day.
Banfield followed with the stranger, and the rest of the Committee
came on two by two, the smaller men enjoying the company in which
they found themselves. So they marched solemnly into the street, a
score of Hatton's men forming a guard of honor, and a long tail of the
riff-raff of the town falling in behind with orange flags and favors.
These at a certain signal set up a shrill cheer, a band struck up
"See, the Conquering Hero Comes!" and the sixteen gentlemen marched,
some proudly and some shamefacedly, into the wider street, wherein a
cart drawn up at the foot of the Maypole awaited them.

On such occasions Englishmen out of uniform do not show well. The
daylight streamed without pity on the Committee as they stalked or
shambled along in their Sunday clothes, and Basset at least felt the
absurdity of the position. With the tail of his eye he discerned that
the stranger was taking off a large white hat, alternately to the
right and left, in acknowledgment of the cheers of the crowd, while
ominous sniggers of laughter mingled here and there with the applause.
Banfield's men, with another hundred or so of the town idlers, were
gathered about the cart, but of the honest and intelligent voters
there were scanty signs.

The crowd greeted the appearance of each of the principals with cheers
and a shaft or two of Stafford wit.

"Hooray! Hooray!" shouted Hatton's men as he climbed into the cart.

"Hatton's a great man now!" a bass voice threw in.

"But he's never lost his taste for tripe!" squeaked a shrill treble.
The gibe won roars of laughter, and the back of the chairman's neck
grew crimson.

"Hurrah for Banfield and the poor man's loaf!" shouted his supporters,
as he mounted in his turn.

"It's little of the crumb he'll leave the poor man!" squeaked the
treble.

It was the candidate's turn to mount next. "Hooray! Hooray!" shouted
the crowd with special fervor. Handkerchiefs were waved from windows,
the band played a little more of the Conquering Hero.

As the music ceased, "What's he doing, Tommy, along o' these chaps?"
asked the treble voice.

"He's waiting for that there Samaritan, Sammy?" answered the bass.

"Ay, ay? And the wine and oil, Sammy?"

It took the crowd a little time to digest this, but in time they did
so, and the gust of laughter that followed covered the appearance of
the stranger. He was not to escape, however, for as the noise ceased,
"Is this the Samaritan, Sammy?" asked the bass.

"Where's your eyes?" whined the treble. "He's the big loaf! and, lor,
ain't he crumby!"

"If I were down there----" the Burnley man began, leaning over the
side of the cart.

"He's crusty, too!" cried the wit.

But this was too much for the chairman. "Silence! Silence!" he cried,
and, as at a signal, there was a rush, the two interrupters were
seized and, surrounded by a gang of hobbledehoys, were hustled down
the road, fighting furiously and shouting, "Blues! Blues!"

The chairman made use of the lull to step to the edge of the cart and
take off his hat. He looked about him, pompous and important.

"Gentlemen," he began, "free and independent electors of our ancient
borough! At a crisis such as this, a crisis the most momentous--the
most momentous----" he paused and looked into his hat, "that history
has known, when the very staff of life is, one may say, the apple of
discord, it is an honor to me to take the chair!"

"The cart you mean!" cried a voice, "you're in the cart!"

The speaker cast a withering glance in the direction whence the voice
came, lost his place and, failing to find it, went on in a different
strain. "I'm a business man," he said, "you all know that! I'm a
business man, and I'm not ashamed of it. I stick to my business and my
business to-day----"

"Better go on with it!"

But he was getting set, and he was not to be abashed. "My business
to-day," he repeated, "is to ask your attention for the distinguished
candidate who seeks your suffrages, and for the--the distinguished
gentleman on my left who will presently follow me."

A hollow groan checked him at this point, but he recovered himself.
"First, however," he continued, "I propose, with your permission, to
say a word on the--the great question of the day--if I may call it so.
It is to the food of the people I refer!"

He paused for cheers, under cover of which Banfield murmured to his
neighbor that Hatton was set now for half an hour. He had yet to learn
that open-air meetings have their advantages.

"The food of the people!" Hatton repeated, uplifted by the applause.
"It is to me a sacred thing! My friends, it is to me the Ark of the
Covenant. The bread is the life. It should go straight, untaxed,
untouched from the field of the farmer to the house of--of the widow
and the orphan!"

"Hear! Hear! Hear! Hear!" Then, "What about the miller?"

"It should go from where it is grown," Hatton repeated, "to where it
is needed; from where it is grown to the homes of the poor! And to the
man," slipping easily and fatally into his Sunday vein, "that lays his
'and upon it, let him be whom he may, I say with the Book, 'Thou shalt
not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn!' The Law, ay, and the
Prophets----"

"Ay, Hatton's profits! Hands off them!" roared the bass voice.

"Low bread and high profits!" shrieked the treble. "Hatton and thirty
per cent!"

A gust of laughter swept all away for a time, and when the speaker
could again get a hearing he had lost his thread and his temper.
"That's a low insinuation!" he cried, crimson in the face. "A low
insinuation! I scorn to answer it!"

"Regular old Puseyite you be," shouted a new tormentor. "Quoting
Scripture."

Hatton shook his fist at the crowd. "A low, dirty insinuation!" he
cried. "I scorn----"

"You don't scorn the profits!"

"Listen! Silence!" Then, "I shall not say another word! You're not
worth it! You're below it! I call on Mr. Brierly of Manchester to
propose a resolution."

And casting vengeful glances here and there where he fancied he
detected an opponent, he stood back. He began for the first time to
think the meeting a mistake. Basset, who had held that opinion from
the first, scanned the crowd and had his misgivings.

The man from Manchester, however, had none. He stood forward, a smile
on his broad face, his chest thrown forward, a something easy in his
air, as became one who had confronted thousands and was not to be put
out of countenance by a few hisses. He waited good-humoredly for
silence. Nor could he see that, behind the cart, there had been
gathering for some time a band of men of a different air from those
