
"And if you do not think fit to take that step, my lord----"

"I shall consider it!"

Another word or two and the deed had been done, for both men were too
angry to fence. But before that last word was spoken Audley's man
entered. He handed a card to his master and waited.

Audley looked at the card longer than was necessary and under cover of
the pause regained control of himself. "Who brought this?" he asked.

"A messenger from the Swan, my lord."

"Tell him----" He broke off. Holding out the card for Stubbs to take,
"Do you know anything about this?" he asked.

Stubbs returned the card. "No, my lord," he said coldly. "I know
nothing."

"Business of great importance to me? D--n his impudence, what business
important to me can he have?" Audley muttered. Then, "My compliments
to Mr. Basset and I am leaving in the morning, but I shall be at home
this evening at nine."

The servant retired. Audley looked askance at his agent. "You'd better
be here," he muttered ungraciously. "We can settle what we were
talking about later."

"Very good, my lord," Stubbs answered. And nothing more being said, he
took himself off.

He was not sorry that they had been interrupted. Much of his income
and more of his importance sprang from the Audley agency, but rather
than be treated as if he were a servant, he would surrender both--in
his way he was a proud man. Still he did not want to give up either;
and if time were given he thought that his lordship would think better
of the matter.

As he returned to his office, choosing the quiet streets by which
he had come, he had a glimpse, through an opening, of the distant
Market-place. A sound of cheering, a glare of smoky light, a medley of
leaping, running forms, a something uplifted above the crowd, moved
across his line of vision. Almost as quickly it vanished, leaving only
the reflection of retreating torches. "Hurrah! Hurrah for Mottisfont!
Hurrah!" Still the cheering came faintly to his ears.

He sighed. Riddsley had remained faithful-by nine! But he did not
deceive himself. It was the writing on the wall. The Corn Laws were
doomed, and with them much that he had loved, much that he cherished,
much in which he believed.




                            CHAPTER XXXVII

                         A TURN OF THE WHEEL


Audley was suspicious and ill at ease. Standing on the hearth-rug with
his back to the fire, he fixed the visitor with his eyes, and with
secret anxiety asked himself what he wanted. The possibility that
Basset came to champion Mary had crossed his mind more than once; if
that were so he would soon dispose of him! In the meantime he took
civility for his cue, exchanged an easy word or two about the poll and
the election, and between times nodded to Stubbs to be seated. Through
all, his eyes were watchful and he missed nothing.

"I asked Mr. Stubbs to be here," he said when a minute or two had been
spent in this by-play, "as you spoke of business. You don't object?"

"Not at all," Basset replied. His face was grave. "I should tell you
at once, Audley," he added, "that my mission is not a pleasant one."

The other raised his eyebrows. "You are sure that it concerns me?"

"It certainly concerns you. Though, as things stand, not very
materially. I knew nothing of the matter myself until three o'clock
to-day, and at first I doubted if it was my duty to communicate it.
But the facts are known to a third person, they may be used to annoy
you in the future, and though the task is unpleasant, I decided that I
had no option."

Audley set his broad shoulders against the mantel-shelf. "But if the
facts don't affect me?" he said.

"In a way they do. Not as they might under other circumstances. That
is all."

"And yet you are making our hair stand on end! I confess you puzzle
me. Well, let us have it. What is it all about?"

"A little time ago you recovered, if you remember, your Family Bible."
"Well? What of that?"

"I have just learned that the man did not hand over all that he had.
He kept back--it now appears--certain papers."

"Ah!" Audley's voice was stern. "Well, he has had his chance. This
time, I can promise him a warrant will follow."

"Perhaps you will hear me out first?"

"No," was the sharp reply. Audley's temper was getting the better of
him. "Last time, my dear fellow, you compounded with him; your motive
an excellent one I don't doubt. But if he now thinks to get more money
from me--and for other papers--I can promise him that he will see the
inside of Stafford gaol. Besides, my good friend, you gave us to
understand that he had surrendered all he had."

"I am afraid I did, and I fear I was wrong. Why he deceived me, and
has now turned about, I know no more than you do!"

"I think I can enlighten you," the other answered--his fears as well
as his temper were aroused. "The rogue is shallow. He thinks to be
paid twice. Once by you and once by me. But you can tell him that this
time he will be paid in other coin."

"I'm afraid that there is more in it than that," Basset said. "The
fact is the papers he now produces, Audley, are of another character."

"Oh! The wind blows in that quarter, does it?" my lord replied. "You
don't mean that you've come here--why, d--n it, man," with sudden
passion, "either you are very simple, or you are art and part----"

"Steady, steady, my lord," Stubbs said, interposing discreetly.
Hitherto he had not spoken. "There's no need to quarrel! I am sure
that Mr. Basset's intentions are friendly. It will be better if he
just tells us what these documents are which are now put forward. We
shall then be able to judge where we stand."

"Go ahead," Audley said, averting his face and sulkily relapsing
against the mantel-shelf. "Put your questions! And, for God's sake,
let's get to the point!"

"The paper that is pertinent is a deed," Basset explained. "I have the
heads of it here. A deed made between Peter Paravicini Audley, your
ancestor, the Audley the date of whose marriage has been always in
issue--between him on the one side, and his father and two younger
brothers on the other."

"What is the date?" Stubbs asked.

"Seventeen hundred and four."

"Very good, Mr. Basset." Stubbs's tone was now as even as he could
make it, but an acute listener would have detected a change in it.
"Proceed, if you please."

Before Basset could comply, my lord broke in. "What's the use of this?
Why the d--l are we going into it?" he cried. "If this man is out for
plunder I will make him smart as sure as my name is Audley! And any
one who supports him. In the meantime I want to hear no more of it!"

Basset moved in his chair as if he would rise. Stubbs intervened.

"That is one way of looking at it, my lord," he said temperately. "And
I'm not saying that it is the wrong way. But I think we had better
hear what Mr. Basset has to say. He is probably deceived----"

"He has let himself be used as a catspaw!" Audley cried. His face was
flushed and there was an ugly look in his eyes.

"But he means us well, I am sure," the lawyer interposed. "At present
I don't see"--he turned and carefully snuffed one of the candles--"I
don't see----"

"I think you do!" Basset answered. He had had a long day and he had
come on an unpleasant business. His own temper was not too good. "You
see this, at any rate, Mr. Stubbs, that such a deed may be of vital
import to your client."

"To me?" Audley exclaimed. Was it possible that the thing he had so
long feared--and had ceased to fear--was going to befall him? Was it
possible that at the eleventh hour, when he had burnt his boats, when
he had thought all danger at an end--no, it was impossible! "To me?"
he repeated passionately.

"Yes," Basset replied. "Or, rather, it would be of vital import to you
in other circumstances."

"In what other circumstances? What do you mean?"

"If you were not about to marry the only person who, with you, is
interested."

Audley cut short, by a tremendous effort, the execration that burst
from his lips. His face, always too fleshy for his years, swelled till
it was purple. Then, and as quickly, the blood ebbed, leaving it gray
and flabby. He would have given much, very much at this moment to be
able to laugh or to utter a careless word. But he could do neither.
The blow had been too sudden, too heavy, too overwhelming. Only in his
nightmares had he seen what he saw now!

Meanwhile Stubbs, startled by the half-uttered oath and a little out
of his depth--for he had heard nothing of the engagement--intervened.
"I think, my lord," he said, "you had better leave this to me. I think
you had, indeed. We are quite in the dark and we are not getting
forward. Let us have the facts, Mr. Basset. What is the gist of this
deed? Or, first, have you seen it?"

"I have."

"And read it?"

"I have."

"It appears to you--I only say it appears--to be genuine?"

"I have no doubt that it is genuine," Basset replied. "It bears the
marks of age, and it was found in the chest with the old Bible. If the
book is genuine----"

The lawyer raised his hand. "Too fast," he said. "You say it was
found! You mean that this man says it was found?"

"Yes."

"Precisely. But there is a difference. Still, we have cleared the
ground. Now, what does this deed purport to be?"

Basset produced a slip of paper. "An agreement," he read from it,
"between Peter Paravicini Audley and his father and his two younger
brothers. After admitting that the entry of the marriage in the
register is misleading and that no marriage took place until after the
birth of his son, Peter Paravicini undertakes that, in consideration
of his father and his brothers taking no action and making no attack
upon his wife's reputation, she being their cousin, he will not set up
for the said son, or the issue of the said son, any claim to the title
or estates."

Audley listened to the description, so clear and so precise, and he
recognized that it tallied with the deed which tradition had always
held to exist but of which John Audley had been able to give no proof.
He heard, he understood; yet while he listened and understood, his
mind was working to another end, and viewing with passion the tragedy
which fate had prepared for him. Too late! Too late! Had this become
known a week, only a week, earlier, how lightly had the blow fallen!
How impotently! But he had cut the rope, he had severed the strands
once carefully twisted, that bound him to safety! And then the irony,
the bitterness, the cruelty of those words of Basset's, "in other
circumstances!" They bit into his mind.

Still he suffered in silence, and only his stillness and his unhealthy
color betrayed the despair that gripped and benumbed his soul. Stubbs
did not look at him; perhaps he was careful not to look at him. The
lawyer sat thinking and drumming gently with his fingers on the table.
"Just so, just so," he said presently. "On the face of it, the
document of which Mr. John Audley tried to give secondary evidence,
and which a person fraudulently inclined would of course concoct. That
touch of the cousin well brought in!"

"But the lady was his cousin," Basset said.

"All the world knows it," the lawyer retorted coolly, "and use has
been made of the knowledge. But, of course, there are a hundred things
to be proved before any weight can be given to this document; its
origin, the custody from which it comes, the signatures, the
witnesses. Its production by a man who has once endeavored to
blackmail is alone suspicious. And the deed itself is at variance with
the evidence of the Bible."

"But that variance bears out the deed, which is to secure the younger
sons' rights while covering the reputation of the lady."

The lawyer shook his head. "Very clever," he said. "But, frankly, the
matter has an ugly look, Mr. Basset."

"Lord Audley says nothing," Basset replied, nettled by the lawyer's
phrase.

"And will say nothing," Stubbs rejoined genially, "if he is advised by
me. In the circumstances, as I understand them, he is not affected as
he might be, but this is still a serious matter. We are not
quarrelling with you for coming to us, Mr. Basset. On the contrary.
But I would like to know why the man came to you."

"The answer is simple," Basset explained. "I am Mr. Audley's executor.
On his account, I am obliged to be interested. The moment I learned
this I saw that, be it true or false, I must disclose it to Miss
Audley. But I thought it fair to open it to Lord Audley first that he
might tell the young lady himself, if he preferred to do so."

Stubbs nodded. "Very proper," he replied. "And where, in the meantime,
is this--precious document?"

"I lodged it with Mr. Audley's bankers this afternoon."

Stubbs nodded again. "Also very proper," he said. "Just so."

Basset rose. "I've told you what I know. If there is nothing more?" he
said. He looked at Audley, who had turned his back on them and, with
his hands in his pockets and one foot on the fender, was gazing into
the fire.

"I think that's all," Stubbs hastened to say. "I am sure that his
lordship is obliged to you, Mr. Basset, though it is a hundred to one
that there is nothing in this."

At that, however, Audley turned about. He had pulled himself together,
and his manner was excellent. "I would like to say that for myself,"
he said frankly, "I owe you many thanks for the straightforward course
you have taken, Basset. You must pardon my momentary annoyance.
Perhaps you will kindly keep this business to yourself for--shall we
say--three days? I will speak myself to my cousin, but I should like
to make one or two inquiries first."

Basset agreed willingly. He hated the whole thing and his part in it.
It forced him to champion, or to seem to champion, Mary against her
betrothed; and so set him in that kind of opposition to his rival
which he loathed. It was only after some hesitation that he had
determined to see Audley, and now that he had seen him, the sooner he
was clear of the matter the happier he would be. So, "Certainly," he
repeated, thinking that the other was taking it very well. "And now,
as I have had a hard day, I will say good-night."

"Good-night, and believe me," my lord added warmly, "we recognize the
friendliness of your action."

Outside, in the darkness of the road, Basset drew a breath of relief.
He had had a hard day and he was utterly weary. But he had come now,
thank God, to an end of many things; of the canvass he had detested
and the contest in which he had been beaten; of his relations with
Mary, whom he had lost; of this imbroglio, which he hated; of Riddsley
and the Gatehouse and the old life there! He could go to his inn and
sleep the clock round. In his bed he would be safe, he would be free
from troubles. It seemed to him a refuge. Till the morrow he need
think of nothing, and when he came forth again it would be to a new
life. Henceforth Blore, his old house and his starved acres must bound
his ambitions. With the money which John Audley had left him he would
dig and drain and fence and build, and be by turns Talpa the mole and
Castor the beaver. In time, as he began to see the fruit of his toil,
he would win to some degree of content, and be glad, looking back,
that he had made this trial of his powers, this essay towards a wider
usefulness. So, in the end, he would come through to peace.

But at this point the current of his thoughts eddied against Toft, and
he cursed the man anew. Why had he played these tricks? Why had he
kept back this paper? Why had he produced it now and cast on others
this unpleasant task?




                           CHAPTER XXXVIII

                        TOFT'S LITTLE SURPRISE


Toft had gone into Riddsley on the polling-day, but had returned
before the result was known. "What the man was thinking of," his wife
declared in wrath, "beats me! To be there hours and hours and come out
no wiser than he went, and we waiting to hear--a babe would ha' had
more sense! The young master that we've known all our lives, to be in
or out, and we to know nothing till morning! It passes patience!"

Mary had her own feelings, but she concealed them. "He must know how
it was going when he left?" she said.

"He doesn't know an identical thing!" Mrs. Toft replied. "And all he'd
say was, 'There, there, what does it matter?' For all the world as if
he spoke to a child! 'What else matters, man?' says I. 'What did you
go for?' But there, Miss, he's beyond me these days! I believe he's
going like the poor master, that had a bee in his bonnet, God forgive
me for saying it! But what'd one not say, and we to wait till morning
not knowing whether those plaguy Repealers are in or out!"

"But Mr. Basset is for Repeal," Mary said.

"What matter what he's for, if he's in?" Mrs. Toft replied loftily.
"But to wait till morning to know--the man's no better than a numps!"

In the end, it was Mr. Colet who brought the news to the Gatehouse. He
brought it to Etruria and so much of moment with it that before noon
the election result had been set aside as a trifle, and Mary found
herself holding a kind of court in the parlor--Mr. Colet plaintiff,
Etruria defendant, Mrs. Toft counsel for the defence. Absence had but
strengthened Mr. Colet's affection, and he came determined to come to
an understanding with his mistress. He saw his way to making a small
income by writing sermons for his more indolent brethren, and, in the
meantime, Mr. Basset was giving him food and shelter; in return he was
keeping Mr. Basset's accounts, and he was saving a little, a very
little, money. But the body of his plea rested not on these counts,
but on the political change. Repeal was in the air, repeal was in the
country. Vote as Riddsley might, the Corn Laws were doomed. His
opinions would no longer be banned; they would soon be the opinions of
the majority, and with a little patience he might find a new curacy.
When that happened he wished to marry Etruria.

"And why not?" Mary asked.

"I will never marry him to disgrace him," Etruria replied. She stood
with bowed head, her hands clasped before her, her beautiful eyes
lowered.

"But you love him?" Mary said, blushing at her own words.

"If I did not love him I might marry him," Etruria rejoined. "I am a
servant, my father's a servant. I should be wronging him, and he would
live to know it."

"To my way o' thinking, 'Truria's right," her mother said. "I never
knew good come of such a marriage! He's poor, begging his reverence's
pardon, but, poor or rich, his place is there." She pointed to the
table. "And 'Truria's place is behind his chair."

"But you forget," Mary said, "that when she is Mr. Colet's wife her
place will be by his side."

"And much good that'll do him with the parsons and such like, as are
all gleg together! If he's in their black books for preaching too
free--and when you come to tithes one parson is as like another as
pigs o' the same litter--he'll not better himself by taking such as
Etruria, take my word for it, Miss!"

"I will never do it," said Etruria.

"But," Mary protested, "Mr. Colet need not live here, and in another
part people will not know what his wife has been. Etruria has good
manners and some education, Mrs. Toft, and what she does not know she
will learn. She will be judged by what she is. If there is a drawback,
it is that such a marriage will divide her from you and from her
father. But if you are prepared for that?"

Mrs. Toft rubbed her nose. "We'd be willing if that were all," she
said. "She'd come to us sometimes, and there'd be no call for us to go
to her."

Mr. Colet looked at Etruria. "If Etruria will come to me," he said, "I
will be ashamed neither of her nor her parents."

"Bravely said!" Mary cried.

"But there's more to it than that," Mrs. Toft objected. "A deal more.
Mr. Colet nor 'Truria can't live upon air. And it's my opinion that if
his reverence gets a curacy, he'll lose it as soon as it's known who
his wife is. And he can't dig and he can't beg, and where'll they be
with the parsons all sticking to one another as close as wax?"

"He'll not need them!" replied a new speaker, and that speaker was
Toft. He had entered silently, none of them had seen him, and the
interruption took them aback. "He'll not need them," he repeated, "nor
their curacies. He'll not need to dig nor beg. There's changes coming.
There's changes coming for more than him, Miss. If Mr. Colet's willing
to take my girl she'll not go to him empty-handed."

"I will take her as she stands," Mr. Colet said, his eyes shining.
"She knows that."

"Well, you'll take her, sir, asking your pardon, with what I give
her," Toft answered. "And that'll be five hundred pounds that I have
in hand, and five hundred more that I look to get. Put 'em together
and they'll buy what's all one with a living, and you'll be your own
rector and may snap your fingers at 'em!"

They stared at the man, while Mrs. Toft, in an awestruck tone, cried,
"You're out of your mind, Toft! Five hundred pounds! Whoever heard of
the like of us with that much money?"

"Silence, woman," Toft said. "You know naught about it."

"But, Toft," Mary said, "are you in earnest? Do you understand what a
large sum of money this is?"

"I have it," the man replied, his sallow cheek reddening. "I have it,
and it's for Etruria."

"If this be true," Mr. Colet said slowly, "I don't know what to say,
Toft."

"You've said all that is needful, sir," Toft replied. "It's long
I've looked forward to this. She's yours, and she'll not come to you
empty-handed, and you'll have no need to be ashamed of a wife that
brings you a living. We'll not trouble except to see her at odd times
in the year. It will be enough for her mother and me that she'll be a
lady. She never was like us."

"Hear the man!" cried Mrs. Toft between admiration and protest. "You'd
suppose she wasn't our child!"

But Mary went to him and gave him her hand. "That's very fine, Toft,"
she said. "I believe Etruria will be as happy as she is good, and Mr.
Colet will have a wife of whom he may be proud. But Etruria will not
be Etruria if she forgets her parents or your gift. Only you are sure
that you are not deceiving yourself?"

"There's my bank-book to show for half of it," Toft replied. "The
other half is as certain if I live three months!"

"Well, I declare!" Mrs. Toft cried. "If anybody'd told me yesterday
that I'd have--'Truria, han't you got a word to say?"

Etruria's answer was to throw her arms round her father's neck. Yet
it is doubtful if the moment was as much to her as to the ungainly,
grim--visaged man, who looked so ill at ease in her embrace.

The contrast between them was such that Mary hastened to relieve the
sufferer. "Etruria will have more to say to Mr. Colet," she said,
"than to us. Suppose we leave them to talk it over."

She saw the Tofts out after another word or two, and followed them.
"Well, well, well!" said Mrs. Toft, when they stood in the hall. "I'm
sure I wish that everybody was as lucky this day--if all's true as
Toft tells us."

"There's some in luck that don't know it!" the man said oracularly.
And he slid away.

"If he said black was white, I'd believe him after this," his wife
exclaimed, "asking your pardon, Miss, for the liberties we've taken!
But you'd always a fancy for 'Truria. Anyway, if there's one will be
pleased to hear the news, it's the Squire! If I'd some of those nine
here that voted against him I'd made their ears burn!"

"But perhaps they thought that Mr. Basset was wrong," Mary said.

"What business had they o' thinking?" Mrs. Toft replied. "They had
ought to vote; that's enough for them."

"Well, it does seem a pity," Mary allowed. And then, because she
fancied that Mrs. Toft looked at her with meaning, she went upstairs
and, putting on her hat and cloak, went out. The day was cold and
bright, a sprinkling of snow lay on the ground, and a walk promised
her an opportunity of thinking things over. Between the Butterflies,
at the entrance to the flagged yard, she hung a moment in doubt, then
she set off across the park in the direction of the Great House.

At first her thoughts were busy with Etruria's fortunes and the
mysterious windfall which had enriched Toft. How had he come by it?
How could he have come by it? And was the man really sane? But soon
her mind took another turn. She had strayed this way on the morning
after her arrival at the Gatehouse, and, remembering this, she looked
across the gray, frost-bitten park, with its rows of leafless trees
and its naked vistas. Her mind travelled back to that happy morning,
and involuntarily she glanced behind her.

But to-day no one followed her, no one was thinking of her. Basset was
gone, gone for good, and it was she who had sent him away. The May
morning when he had hurried after her, the May sunshine, gay with the
songs of larks and warm with the scents of spring were of the past.
To-day she looked on a bare, cold landscape and her thoughts matched
it. Yet she had no ground to complain, she told herself, no reason to
be unhappy. Things might have been worse, ah, so much worse, she
reflected. For a week ago she had been a captive, helpless, netted in
her own folly! And now she was free.

Yes, she ought to be happy, being free; and, more than free,
independent.

But she must go from here. And for many reasons the thought of going
was painful to her. During the nine months which she had spent at the
Gatehouse it had become a home. Its panelled rooms, its austerity, its
stillness, the ancient woodlands about it were endeared to her by the
memory of lamp-lit evenings and long summer days. The very plainness
and solitude of the life, which had brought the Tofts and Etruria so
near to her, had been a charm. And if her sympathy with her uncle had
been imperfect, still he had been her uncle and he had been kind to
her.

All this she must leave, and something else which she did not define;
which was bound up with it, and which she had come to value when it
was too late. She had taken brass for gold, and tin for silver! And
now it was too late. So that it was no wonder that when she came to
the hawthorn-tree where she had gathered her may that morning, a sob
rose in her throat. She knew the tree! She had marked it often. But
to-day there was no one to follow her, no one to call her back, no one
to say that she should go no farther. Basset was gone, her uncle was
dead.

Telling herself that, as she would never see it again, she would go as
far as the Great House, she pushed on to the Yew Walk. Its recesses
showed dark, the darker for the sprinkling of snow that lay in the
park. But it was high noon, there was nothing to fear, and she pursued
the path until she came to the crumbling monster that tradition said
was a butterfly.

She was still viewing it with awe, thinking now of the duel which had
taken place there, now of her uncle's attack, when a bird moved in the
copse and she glanced nervously behind her, expecting she knew not
what. The dark yews shut her in, and involuntarily she shivered. What
if, in this solitary place--and then through the silence the sharp
click of the Iron Gate reached her ear.

The stillness and the associations shook her nerves. She heard
footsteps and, hardly knowing what she feared, she slipped among the
trees and stood half-hidden. A moment passed and a man appeared. He
came from the Great House. He crossed the opening slowly, his chin
sunk upon his breast, his eyes bent on the path before him. A moment
and he was gone, the way she had come, without seeing her.

It was Lord Audley, and foolish as the impulse to hide herself had
been, she blessed it. Nothing pleasant, nothing good, could have come
of their meeting; and into her thoughts of him had crept so much of
distaste that she was glad that she had not met him in this lonely
spot. She went on to the Iron Gate, and viewed for a few moments the
desolate lawn and the long, gaunt front. Then, reflecting that if she
turned back at once she might meet him, she took a side-path through
the plantation, and emerged on the park at another point.

She was careful not to reach home until late in the day and then she
learned that he had called, that he had waited, and that in the end
Toft had seen him; and that he had departed in no good temper. "What
Toft said to him," Mrs. Toft reported, "I know no more than the moon,
but whatever it was his lordship marched off, Miss, as black as
thunder."

After that nothing happened, and of the four at the Gatehouse Etruria
alone was content. Mrs. Toft was uneasy about the future--what were
they going to do?--and perplexed by Toft's mysterious fortune--how had
he come by it? Toft himself was on the rack, looking for things to
happen--and nothing happened. And Mary knew that she must take action.
She could not stay at the Gatehouse, she could not remain as the guest
either of Basset or of Lord Audley.

But she did not know where to go, and no suggestion reached her. At
length she wrote, two days after Lord Audley's visit, to Quebec
Street, to the house where she had stayed with her father many years
before. It was the only address of the kind that she knew. But she
received no answer, and her heart sank. The difficulty, small as it
was, harassed her; she had no adviser, and ten times a day, to keep up
her spirits, she had tell herself that she was independent, that she
had eight thousand pounds, that the whole world was open to her, and
that compared with the penniless girl who had lived on the upper floor
of the Hôtel Lambert she was fortunate!

But in the Hôtel Lambert she had had work to do, and here she had
none!

She thought of taking rooms in Riddsley, but Lord Audley was there and
she shrank from meeting him. She would wait another week for the
answer from London, and then, if none came, she must decide what she
would do. But in her room that night the thought that Basset had
abandoned her, that he no longer cared, no longer desired to come near
her, broke her down. Of course, he was not to blame. He fancied her
still engaged to her cousin and receiving from him all the advice, all
the help, all the love, she needed. He fancied her happy and content,
in no need of him. And, alas, there was the pinch. She had written to
him to tell him of her engagement. She could not write to him to tell
him that it was at an end!

And then, by the morrow's post, there came a long letter from Basset,
and in the letter the whole astonishing, overwhelming story of the
discovery of the document which John Audley had sought so long, and in
the end so disastrously.


"No doubt," the writer added, "Lord Audley has made you acquainted
with the facts, but I think it my duty as your uncle's executor to
lay them before you in detail and also to advise you that in your
interest and in view of the change in your position--and in Lord
Audley's--which this imports, it is proper that you should have
independent advice."


The blood ebbed and left Mary pale; it returned in a flood as with a
bounding heart and shaking fingers she read and turned and re-read
this letter. At length she grasped its meaning, and truly what
astounding, what overwhelming news! What a shift of fortune! What a
reversal of expectations! And how strangely, how singularly had all
things shaped themselves to bring this about--were it true!

Unable to sit still, unable to control her excitement--and no
wonder--she rose and paced the floor. If she were indeed Lady Audley!
If this were indeed all hers! This dear house and the Great House!
This which had seemed to its possessor so small, so meagre, so
cramping an inheritance, but was to her fortune, an old name, a great
place, a firm position in the world! A position that offered so many
opportunities and so much power for good!

She walked the room with throbbing pulses, the letter now crushed in
her hand, now smoothed out that she might assure herself of its
meaning, might read again some word or some sentence, might resolve
some doubt. Oh, it was a wonderful, it was a marvellous, it was an
incredible turn of fortune! And presently her mind began to deal with
and to sift the past. And, enlightened, she understood many of the
things that had perplexed her, and read many of the riddles that had
baffled her. And her cheeks burned, her heart was hot with
indignation.




                            CHAPTER XXXIX

                       THE DEED OF RENUNCIATION


Basset moved in his chair. He was unhappy and ill at ease. He looked
at the fire, he looked askance at Mary. "But do you mean," he said,
"that you knew nothing about this until you had my letter?"

"Nothing," Mary answered, "not a word." She, too, found it more easy
to look at the fire.

"You must have been very much surprised?"

"I was. It was for that reason that I asked you to bring me the
papers--to bring me everything, so that I might see for myself how it
was."

"I don't understand why Audley did not tell you. He said he would."

It was the question Mary had foreseen and dreaded. She had slept two
nights upon the letter and given a long day's thought to it, and
she had made up her mind what she would do and how she would do it.
But between the planning and the doing there were passages which she
would fain have shunned, fain have omitted, had it been possible; and
this was one of them. She saw that there was nothing else for it,
however--the thing must be told, and told by her. She tried, and not
without success, to command her voice. "He did not tell me," she said.
"Indeed I have not seen him. And I ought to say, Mr. Basset, you ought
to know in these circumstances--that the engagement between my cousin
and myself is at an end."

He may have started--he might well be astonished, in view of the
business which brought him there. But he did not speak, and Mary could
not tell what effect it had on him. She only knew that the silence
seemed age-long, the pause cruel, and that her heart was beating so
loudly that it seemed to her that he must hear it. At last, "Do you
mean," he asked, his voice muffled and uncertain, "that it is all over
between you?"

"It is quite over between us," she answered soberly. "It was a mistake
from the beginning."

"When--when did he----"

"Oh, before this arose. Some time before this arose." She spoke
lightly, but her cheeks were hot.

"He did not tell me."

"No?"

"No," Basset repeated. He spoke angrily, as if he felt this a
grievance, but in no other way could he have masked his emotion.
Perhaps he did not mask it altogether, for she was observing him--ah,
how keenly was she observing him! "On the contrary, he led me to
believe," he continued, "that things were as before between you, and
that he would tell you this himself. It was for that reason that I let
a week go by before I wrote to you."

"Just so," she said, squeezing her handkerchief into a ball, and
telling herself that the worst was over now, the story told, that in
another minute this would be done and past. "Just so, I quite
understand. At any rate there is no longer any question of that, Mr.
Basset. And now," briskly, "may I see this famous deed which is to do
so much. You brought it with you, I hope?"

"Yes, I brought it," he answered heavily. He took a packet of papers
from his breast-pocket, and it did not escape her--she was cooler
now--that his fingers were not as steady as a man's fingers should be.
The packet he brought out was tied about with old and faded green
ribbon, and bore a docket on the outside. She looked at it with
curiosity. That ribbon had been tied by a long-dead hand in the reign
of Queen Anne! Those yellowish papers had lain in damp and darkness a
hundred and forty years, that in the end they might take John Audley's
life! "I brought them from the bank this afternoon," he explained.
"They have been in the bank's custody since they were handed to me,
and I must return them to the bank to-night."

"Everything depends upon them, I suppose?"

"Everything."

"But I thought that it was a deed--just one paper?" she said.

"The actual instrument is a deed. This one!" He took it from the
series as he untied the packet. "The other papers are of value as
corroboration. They are letters, original letters, bearing on the
preparation of the agreement. They were found all together as they are
now, and in the same order. I did not disclose the letters to Audley,
or to his lawyer, because I had not then gone through them; nor was it
necessary to disclose them. I have since examined them, and they
provide ample proof of the genuineness of the deed."

"So that you think...?"

"I do not think that it can be contested. I am sure that it
cannot--with success. And if it be admitted, your opponent's case is
gone. It was practically common ground in the former suit that if this
agreement could be produced and proved his claim fell to the ground.
Yours remains. I do not suppose," Basset concluded, "that he will
contest it, save as a matter of form."

"I am sorry for him," she said thoughtfully. And almost for the first
time her eyes met his. But he was not responsive. He shrugged his
shoulders. "He has had it long enough to feel the loss of it," she
continued, still bidding for his sympathy. "May I look at that
now--the deed?" She held out her hand.

He gave it to her. It was a folded sheet of parchment, yellow with age
and not very large, perhaps ten inches square. Three or four seals of
green wax on ribbon ends dangled from it. It was written all over in a
fine and curious penmanship, its initial letter adorned with a
portrait of Queen Anne; altogether a pretty and delicate thing, but
small--so small, she thought, to effect so great a change, to carry,
to wreck, to make the fortunes of a house!

She handled it gently, almost fearfully, with awe and a little
distaste. She turned it, she read the signatures. They were clear but
faint. The ink had turned brown.

"Peter Paravicini Audley," she murmured. "He must have signed it
sadly, to save his wife, his cousin, a young girl, a girl of my age
perhaps! To save her name!" There was a quaver in her voice. Basset
moved uncomfortably.

"They are all dead," he said.

"Yes, they are all dead," she agreed. "And their joys and failings,
hopes and fears--all dead! It seems a pity that this should live to
betray them."

"Not a pity on your account."

"No. You are glad, of course?"

"That you should have your rights?" he said manfully. "Of course I
am."

"And you congratulate me?" She rose and held out her hand. Her eyes
were shining, there were tears in them, and her face was marvellously
soft. "You will be the first, won't you, to congratulate me? You who
have done so much for me, you who have been my friend through all? You
who have brought me this? You will wish me joy?"

He was deeply moved; how deeply he could not hide from her, and her
last doubt faded. He took her hand--his own was cold--but he could not
speak. At last, "May you be very happy! It is my one wish, Lady
Audley!"

She let his hand fall. "Thank you," she said gently. "I think that I
shall be happy. And now--now," in a firmer tone, "will you do
something for me, Mr. Basset? It is not much. Will you deal with Toft
for me? You told me in your letter that he held my uncle's note for
£800, to be paid in the event of the discovery of these papers? And
that £300, already paid, might be set off against this?"

"That is so."

"The money should be paid, of course."

"I fear it must be paid."

"Will you see him and tell him that it shall be. I--I am fond of
Etruria, but I am not so fond of Toft, and I would rather not--would
you see him about this?"

"I quite understand," Basset answered. "Of course I will do it." They
had both regained the ordinary plane of feeling and he spoke in his
usual tone. "You would like me to see him now?"

"If you please."

He went from the room. There were other things that as executor he
must arrange, and when he had dealt with Toft, and not without a hard
word or two that went home, had settled that matter, he went round the
house and gave the orders he had to give. The light was beginning to
fail and shadows to fill the corners, and as he glanced into this room
and that and viewed the long-remembered places and saw ghosts and
heard the voices of the dead, he knew that he was taking leave of many
things, of things that had made up a large part of his life.

And he had other thoughts hardly more cheering. Mary's engagement was
broken off. But how? By whom? Had she freed herself? Or had Audley,
_immemor Divum_, and little foreseeing the discovery that trod upon
his threshold, freed her? And if so, why? He was in the dark as to
this and as to all--her attitude, her thoughts, her feelings. He knew
only that while her freedom trebled the moment of the news he had
brought, the gifts of fortune which that news laid at her feet, rose
insuperable between them and formed a barrier he could not pass.

For he could never woo her now. Whatever dawn of hope crept quivering
above the horizon--and she had been kind, ah, in that moment of
softness and remembrance she had been kind!--he could never speak now.

The dusk was far advanced and firelight was almost the only light
when, after half an hour's absence, he returned to the parlor. Mary
was standing before the hearth, her slender figure darkly outlined
against the blaze. She held the poker in her hand, and she was
stooping forward; and something in her pose, something in the tense
atmosphere of the room, drew his gaze--he never knew why--to the table
on which he had left the papers. It was bare. He looked round, he
could not see them, a cry broke from him. "Mary!"

"They don't burn easily," she said, a quaver of exultation and
defiance in her tone. "Parchment is so hard to burn--it burns so
slowly, though I made a good fire on purpose!"

"D--n!" he cried, and he was going to seize, he tried to seize her
arm. But he saw the next moment that it was useless, he saw that it
was too late. "Are you mad? Are you mad?" he cried. Frantically, he
went down on his knees, he raked among the embers. But he knew that it
was futile, he had known it before he knelt, and he stood up again
with a gesture of despair. "My G--d!" he said. "Do you know what you
have done? You have destroyed what cannot be replaced! You have ruined
your claim! You must have been mad! Mad, to do it!"

"Why, mad? Because I do not wish to be Lady Audley?" she said, facing
him calmly, with her hands behind her.

"Mad!" he repeated, bitter self-reproach in his voice. For he felt
himself to blame, he felt the full burden of his responsibility. He
had left the papers with her, the true value of which she might not
have known! And she had done this dreadful, this fatal, this
irreparable thing!

She faced his anger without a quiver. "Why, mad!" she repeated. She
was quite at her ease now. "Because, having been jilted by my cousin,
I do not wish for this common, this vulgar, this poor revenge? Because
I will not stoop to the game he plays and has played? Because I will
not take from him what is little to me who have not had it, but much,
nay all, to him who has?"

"But your uncle?" he cried. He was striving desperately to collect
himself, trying to see the thing all round and not only as she saw it,
but in its consequences. "Your uncle, whose one aim, whose one object
in life----"

"Was to be Lord Audley? Believe me," she replied gently, "he sees more
clearly now. And he is dead."

"But there are still--those who come after you?"

"Will they be better, happier, more useful?" she answered. "Will they
be less Audleys, with less of ancient blood running in their veins
because of what I have done? Because I have refused to rake up this
old, pitiful, forgotten stain, this scandal of Queen Elizabeth? No, a
thousand times no! And do not think, do not think," she continued more
soberly, "that I have acted in haste or on impulse. I have not had
this out of my thoughts for a moment since I knew the truth. I have
weighed, carefully weighed, the price, and as carefully decided to pay
it. My duty? I can do it, I hope, as well in one station as another.
For the rest there is only one who will lose by it"--she faced him
bravely now--"only one who will have the right to blame me--ever."

"I may have no right----"

"No you have no right at present."

"Still----"

"When you have the right--when you have gained the right, if ever--you
may blame me."

Was he deceived? Was it the fact or only his fancy, a mere
will-o'-the-wisp inviting him to trouble that led him to imagine that
she looked at him queerly? With a mingling of raillery and tenderness,
with a tear and a smile, with something in her eyes that he had never
seen in them before? With--with--but her face was in shadow, she had
her back to the blaze that filled the room with dancing lights, and
his thoughts were in a turmoil of confusion. "I wish I knew," he said
in a low voice, "what you meant by that?"

"By what?"

"By what you have just said. Did you mean that now that he--now that
Audley is out of the way, there was a chance for me?"

"A chance for you?" she repeated. She stared at him in seeming
astonishment.

"Don't play with me!" he cried, advancing upon her. "You understand
me? You understand me very well! Yes, or no, Mary?"

She did not flinch. "There is no chance for you," she answered slowly,
still confronting him. "If there be a second chance for me----"

"Ah!"

"For me, Peter?" And with that her tone told him all, all there was to
tell. "If you are willing to take me second-hand," she continued, with
a tremulous laugh, "you may take me. I don't deserve it, but I know my
own mind now. I have known it since the day my uncle died and I heard
your step come through the hall. And if you are still willing?"

He did not answer her, but he took her. He held her to him, his heart
too full for anything but a thankfulness beyond speech, while she,
shaken out of her composure, trembled between tears and laughter.
"Peter! Peter!" she said again and again. And once, "We are the same
height, Peter!" and so showed him a new side of her nature which
thrilled him with surprise and happiness.

That she brought him no title, no lands, that by her own act she had
flung away her inheritance and came to him almost empty-handed was no
pain to him, no subject for regret. On the contrary, every word she
had said on that, every argument she had used, came home to him now
with double force. It had been a poor, it had been a common, it had
been a pitiful revenge! It had mingled the sordid with the cup, it had
cast the shadow of the Great House on their happiness. In that room in
which they had shared their first meal on that far May morning, and
where the light of the winter fire now shone on the wainscot, now
brought life to the ruffed portraits above it, there was no question
of name or fortune, or more or less.

So much so, that when Mrs. Toft came in with the tea she well-nigh
dropped the tray in her surprise. As she said afterwards, "The sight
of them two as close as chives in a barrel, I declare you might ha'
knocked me down with a straw! God bless 'em!"




                              CHAPTER XL

                    "LET US MAKE OTHERS THANKFUL"


A man can scarcely harbor a more bitter thought than that he has lost
by foul play what fair play would have won for him. This for a week
was Lord Audley's mood and position; for masterful as he was he owned
the power of Nemesis, he felt the force of tradition, nor, try as he
might, could he convince himself that in face of this oft-cited deed
his chance of retaining the title and property was anything but
desperate. He made the one attempt to see Mary of which we know; and
had he seen her he would have done his best to knot again the tie
which he had cut. But missing her by a hair's breadth, and confronted
by Toft who knew all, he had found even his courage unequal to a
second attempt. The spirit in which Mary had faced the breach had
shown his plan to be from the first a counsel of despair, and
despairing he let her go. In a dark mood he sat down to wait for the
next step on the enemy's part, firmly resolved that whatever form it
might take he would contest the claim to the bitter end.

And Stubbs was scarcely in happier case. At the time, and face to face
with Basset, he had borne up well, but the production of the fateful
deed had none the less fallen on him with stunning effect. He
appreciated--none better and more clearly now--what the effect of his
easiness would have been had Lord Audley not been engaged to his
cousin; nor did his negligence appear in a less glaring light because
his patron was to escape its worst results. He foresaw that whatever
befel he must suffer, and that the agency which his family had so long
enjoyed--that, that at any rate was forfeit.

This was enough to make him a most unhappy, a most miserable man. But
it did not stand alone. Everything seemed to him to be going wrong.
All good things, public and private, seemed to be verging on their
end. The world as he had known it for sixty years was crumbling about
his ears. It was time that he was gone.

Certainly the days of that Protection with which he believed the
welfare of the land to be bound up, were numbered. In the House Lord
George and Mr. Disraeli--those strangest of bedfellows!--might rage,
the old Protectionist party might foam, invective and sarcasm, taunt
and sneer might rain upon the traitor as he sat with folded arms and
hat drawn down to his eyes, rectors might fume and squires swear; the
end was certain, and Stubbs saw that it was. Those rascals in the
North, they and their greed and smoke, that stained the face of
England, would win and were winning. He had saved Riddsley by
nine--but to what end? What was one vote among so many? He thought of
the nut-brown ale, the teeming stacks, the wagoner's home,


              Hard-by, a cottage chimney smokes
              From betwixt two aged oaks.


He thought of the sweet cow-stalls, the brook where he had bent his
first pin, and he sighed. Half the country folk would be ruined, and
Shoddy from Halifax and Brass from Bury would buy their lands and walk
in gaiters where better men had foundered. The country would be full
of new men--Peels!

Well, it would last his time. But some day there would rise another
Buonaparte and they would find Cobden with his calico millennium a
poor stay against starvation, his lean and flashy songs a poor
substitute for wheat. It was all money now; the kindly feeling, the
Christmas dole, the human ties, where father had worked for father and
son for son, and the thatch had covered three generations--all these
were past and gone. He found one fault, it is true, in the past. He
had one regret, as he looked back. The laborers' wage had been too
low; they had been left outside the umbrella of Protection. He saw
that now; there was the weak point in the case. "That's where they hit
us," he said more than once, "the foundation was too narrow." But the
knowledge came too late.

Naturally he buried his private mishap--and my lord's--in silence. But
his mien was changed. He was an altered, a shaken man. When he passed
through the streets, he walked with his chin on his breast, his
shoulders bowed. He shunned men's eyes. Then one day Basset entered
his office and for a long time was closeted with him.

When he left Stubbs left also, and his bearing was so subtly changed
as to impress all who met him; while Farthingale, stepping out in his
absence, drank his way through three brown brandies in a silence which
grew more portentous with every glass. At The Butterflies, whither the
lawyer hastened, Audley met him with moody and repellent eyes, and in
the first flush of the news which the lawyer brought refused to
believe it. It was not only that the tidings seemed too good to be
true, the relief from the nightmare which weighed upon him too great
to be readily accepted. But the thing that Mary had done was so far
out of his ken and so much beyond his understanding that he could not
rise to it, or credit it. Even when he at last took in the truth of
the story he put upon it the interpretation that was natural to him.

"It was a forgery!" he cried with an oath. "You may depend upon it, it
was a forgery and they discovered it."

But Stubbs would not agree to that. Stubbs was very stout about it,
and giving details of his conversation with Basset gradually persuaded
his patron. In one way, indeed, the news coming through him wrought a
benefit which neither Mary nor Basset had foreseen. It once more
commended him to Audley, and by and by healed the breach which had
threatened to sever the long connection between the lawyer and
Beaudelays. If Stubbs's opinion of my lord could never again be wholly
what it had been, if Audley still had hours of soreness when the
other's negligence recurred to his mind, at least they were again at
one as to the future. They were once more free to look forward to a
time when a marriage with Lady Adela, or her like, would rebuild the
fortunes of the Great House. Of Audley, whose punishment if short had
been severe, one thing at least may be ventured with safety--and
beyond this we need not inquire; that to the end his first, last,
greatest thought would be--himself!

Late in June, the Corn Laws were repealed. On the same day Sir Robert
Peel, in the eyes of some the first, in the eyes of others the last of
men, was forced to resign. Thwarted by old friends and abandoned by
new ones, he fell by a man[oe]uvre which even his enemies could not
defend. Whether he was more to be blamed for blindness than he was to
be praised for rectitude, are questions on which party spirit has much
to say, nor has history as yet pronounced a final decision. But if his
hand gave the victory to the class from which he sprang, he was at
least free from the selfishness of that class. He had ideals, he was a
man,


              He nothing common did nor mean,
              Upon that memorable scene,
                But bowed his comely head,
                Down as upon a bed.


Nor is it possible, even for those who do not agree with him, to think
of his dramatic fall without sympathy.

In the same week Basset and Mary were married. They spent their
honeymoon after a fashion of their own, for they travelled through the
north of England, and beginning with the improvements which Lord
Francis Egerton was making along the Manchester Canal, they continued
their quiet journey along the inland waterways which formed in the
'forties a link, now forgotten, between the great cities. In this
way--somewhat to the disgust of Mary's new maid, whose name was
Joséphine--they visited strange things; the famous land-warping upon
the Humber, the Doncaster drainage system in Yorkshire, the Horsfall
dairies. They brought back to the old gabled house at Blore some ideas
which were new even to old Hayward--though the "Duke" would never have
admitted this.

"Now that we are not protected, we must bestir ourselves," Basset said
on the last evening before their return. "I'll inquire about a seat,
if you like," he added reluctantly.

Mary was standing behind him. She put her hand on his shoulder. "You
are paying me out, Peter," she said. "I know now that I don't know as
much as I thought I knew."

"Which means?" Basset said, smiling.

"That once I thought that nothing could be done without an earthquake.
I know now that it can be done with a spade."

"So that where Mary was content with nothing but a gilt coach, Mrs.
Basset is content with a nutshell."

"If you are in the nutshell," Mary answered softly, "only--for what we
have received, Peter--let us make other people thankful."

"We will try," he answered.



                               THE END









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great House, by Stanley J. Weyman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT HOUSE ***

***** This file should be named 39294-8.txt or 39294-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/9/39294/

Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (University of Michigan)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
