almost physical pleasure in the sensation of his nearness, and
his caresses, and moral soothing, when she met his simple,
confiding, and loving glance, and heard his naïve questions.
Anna took out the presents Dolly's children had sent him, and
told her son what sort of little girl was Tanya at Moscow, and
how Tanya could read, and even taught the other children.

"Why, am I not so nice as she?" asked Seryozha.

"To me you're nicer than anyone in the world."

"I know that," said Seryozha, smiling.

Anna had not had time to drink her coffee when the Countess Lidia
Ivanovna was announced.  The Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a tall,
stout woman, with an unhealthily sallow face and splendid,
pensive black eyes.  Anna liked her, but today she seemed to be
seeing her for the first time with all her defects.

"Well, my dear, so you took the olive branch?" inquired Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, as soon as she came into the room.

"Yes, it's all over, but it was all much less serious than we had
supposed," answered Anna.  "My _belle-soeur_ is in general too
hasty."

But Countess Lidia Ivanovna, though she was interested in
everything that did not concern her, had a habit of never
listening to what interested her; she interrupted Anna:

"Yes, there's plenty of sorrow and evil in the world.  I am so
worried today."

"Oh, why?" asked Anna, trying to suppress a smile.

"I'm beginning to be weary of fruitlessly championing the truth,
and sometimes I'm quite unhinged by it.  The Society of the
Little Sisters" (this was a religiously-patriotic, philanthropic
institution) "was going splendidly, but with these gentlemen it's
impossible to do anything," added Countess Lidia Ivanovna in a
tone of ironical submission to destiny.  "They pounce on the
idea, and distort it, and then work it out so pettily and
unworthily.  Two or three people, your husband among them,
understand all the importance of the thing, but the others simply
drag it down.  Yesterday Pravdin wrote to me..."

Pravdin was a well-known Panslavist abroad, and Countess Lidia
Ivanovna described the purport of his letter.

Then the countess told her of more disagreements and intrigues
against the work of the unification of the churches, and departed
in haste, as she had that day to be at the meeting of some
society and also at the Slavonic committee.

"It was all the same before, of course; but why was it I didn't
notice it before?" Anna asked herself.  "Or has she been very
much irritated today? It's really ludicrous; her object is doing
good; she a Christian, yet she's always angry; and she always has
enemies, and always enemies in the name of Christianity and doing
good."

After Countess Lidia Ivanovna another friend came, the wife of a
chief secretary, who told her all the news of the town.  At three
o'clock she too went away, promising to come to dinner.  Alexey
Alexandrovitch was at the ministry.  Anna, left alone, spent the
time till dinner in assisting at her son's dinner (he dined apart
from his parents) and in putting her things in order, and in
reading and answering the notes and letters which had accumulated
on her table.

The feeling of causeless shame, which she had felt on the
journey, and her excitement, too, had completely vanished.  In
the habitual conditions of her life she felt again resolute and
irreproachable.

She recalled with wonder her state of mind on the previous day.
"What was it?  Nothing.  Vronsky said something silly, which it
was easy to put a stop to, and I answered as I ought to have
done.  To speak of it to my husband would be unnecessary and out
of the question.  To speak of it would be to attach importance to
what has no importance."  She remembered how she had told her
husband of what was almost a declaration made her at Petersburg
by a young man, one of her husband's subordinates, and how Alexey
Alexandrovitch had answered that every woman living in the world
was exposed to such incidents, but that he had the fullest
confidence in her tact, and could never lower her and himself by
jealousy.  "So then there's no reason to speak of it?  And
indeed, thank God, there's nothing to speak of," she told
herself.



Chapter 33


Alexey Alexandrovitch came back from the meeting of the ministers
at four o'clock, but as often happened, he had not time to come
in to her.  He went into his study to see the people waiting for
him with petitions, and to sign some papers brought him by his
chief secretary.  At dinner time (there were always a few people
dining with the Karenins) there arrived an old lady, a cousin of
Alexey Alexandrovitch, the chief secretary of the department and
his wife, and a young man who had been recommended to Alexey
Alexandrovitch for the service.  Anna went into the drawing room
to receive these guests.  Precisely at five o'clock, before the
bronze Peter the First clock had struck the fifth stroke, Alexey
Alexandrovitch came in, wearing a white tie and evening coat with
two stars, as he had to go out directly after dinner.  Every
minute of Alexey Alexandrovitch's life was portioned out and
occupied.  And to make time to get through all that lay before
him every day, he adhered to the strictest punctuality.
"Unhasting and unresting," was his motto.  He came into the
dining hall, greeted everyone, and hurriedly sat down, smiling to
his wife.

"Yes, my solitude is over.  You wouldn't believe how
uncomfortable" (he laid stress on the word _uncomfortable_) "it
is to dine alone."

At dinner he talked a little to his wife about Moscow matters,
and, with a sarcastic smile, asked her after Stepan Arkadyevitch;
but the conversation was for the most part general, dealing with
Petersburg official and public news.  After dinner he spent half
an hour with his guests, and again, with a smile, pressed his
wife's hand, withdrew, and drove off to the council.  Anna did
not go out that evening either to the Princess Betsy Tverskaya,
who, hearing of her return, had invited her, nor to the theater,
where she had a box for that evening.  She did not go out
principally because the dress she had reckoned upon was not
ready.  Altogether, Anna, on turning, after the departure of her
guests, to the consideration of her attire, was very much
annoyed.  She was generally a mistress of the art of dressing
well without great expense, and before leaving Moscow she had
given her dressmaker three dresses to transform.  The dresses had
to be altered so that they could not be recognized, and they
ought to have been ready three days before.  It appeared that two
dresses had not been done at all, while the other one had not
been altered as Anna had intended.  The dressmaker came to
explain, declaring that it would be better as she had done it,
and Anna was so furious that she felt ashamed when she thought of
it afterwards.  To regain her serenity completely she went into
the nursery, and spent the whole evening with her son, put him to
bed herself, signed him with the cross, and tucked him up.  She
was glad she had not gone out anywhere, and had spent the evening
so well.  She felt so light-hearted and serene, she saw so
clearly that all that had seemed to her so important on her
railway journey was only one of the common trivial incidents of
fashionable life, and that she had no reason to feel ashamed
before anyone else or before herself.  Anna sat down at the
hearth with an English novel and waited for her husband.  Exactly
at half-past nine she heard his ring, and he came into the room.

"Here you are at last!" she observed, holding out her hand to
him.

He kissed her hand and sat down beside her.

"Altogether then, I see your visit was a success," he said to
her.

"Oh, yes," she said, and she began telling him about everything
from the beginning: her journey with Countess Vronskaya, her
arrival, the accident at the station.  Then she described the
pity she had felt, first for her brother, and afterwards for
Dolly.

"I imagine one cannot exonerate such a man from blame, though he
is your brother," said Alexey Alexandrovitch severely.

Anna smiled.  She knew that he said that simply to show that
family considerations could not prevent him from expressing his
genuine opinion.  She knew that characteristic in her husband,
and liked it.

"I am glad it has all ended so satisfactorily, and that you are
back again," he went on.  "Come, what do they say about the new
act I have got passed in the council?"

Anna had heard nothing of this act, And she felt
conscience-stricken at having been able so readily to forget what
was to him of such importance.

"Here, on the other hand, it has made a great sensation," he
said, with a complacent smile.

She saw that Alexey Alexandrovitch wanted to tell her something
pleasant to him about it, and she brought him by questions to
telling it.  With the same complacent smile he told her of the
ovations he had received in consequence of the act he had
passed.

"I was very, very glad.  It shows that at last a reasonable and
steady view of the matter is becoming prevalent among us."

Having drunk his second cup of tea with cream, and bread, Alexey
Alexandrovitch got up, and was going towards his study.

"And you've not been anywhere this evening? You've been dull, I
expect?" he said.

"Oh, no!" she answered, getting up after him and accompanying him
across the room to his study.  "What are you reading now?" she
asked.

"Just now I'm reading Duc de Lille, _Poésie des Enfers,_"
he answered.  "A very remarkable book."

Anna smiled, as people smile at the weaknesses of those they
love, and, putting her hand under his, she escorted him to the
door of the study.  She knew his habit, that had grown into a
necessity, of reading in the evening.  She knew, too, that in
spite of his official duties, which swallowed up almost the whole
of his time, he considered it his duty to keep up with everything
of note that appeared in the intellectual world.  She knew, too,
that he was really interested in books dealing with politics,
philosophy, and theology, that art was utterly foreign to his
nature; but, in spite of this, or rather, in consequence of it,
Alexey Alexandrovitch never passed over anything in the world of
art, but made it his duty to read everything.  She knew that in
politics, in philosophy, in theology, Alexey Alexandrovitch often
had doubts, and made investigations; but on questions of art and
poetry, and, above all, of music, of which he was totally devoid
of understanding, he had the most distinct and decided opinions.
He was fond of talking about Shakespeare, Raphael, Beethoven, of
the significance of new schools of poetry and music, all of which
were classified by him with very conspicuous consistency.

"Well, God be with you," she said at the door of the study, where
a shaded candle and a decanter of water were already put by his
armchair.  "And I'll write to Moscow."

He pressed her hand, and again kissed it.

"All the same he's a good man; truthful, good-hearted, and
remarkable in his own line," Anna said to herself going back to
her room, as though she were defending him to someone who had
attacked him and said that one could not love him.  "But why is
it his ears stick out so strangely? Or has he had his hair cut?"

Precisely at twelve o'clock, when Anna was still sitting at her
writing table, finishing a letter to Dolly, she heard the sound
of measured steps in slippers, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, freshly
washed and combed, with a book under his arm, came in to her.

"It's time, it's time," said he, with a meaning smile, and he
went into their bedroom.

"And what right had he to look at him like that?" thought Anna,
recalling Vronsky's glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch.

Undressing, she went into the bedroom; but her face had none of
the eagerness which, during her stay in Moscow, had fairly
flashed from her eyes and her smile; on the contrary, now the
fire seemed quenched in her, hidden somewhere far away.



Chapter 34


When Vronsky went to Moscow from Petersburg, he had left his
large set of rooms in Morskaia to his friend and favorite comrade
Petritsky.

Petritsky was a young lieutenant, not particularly
well-connected, and not merely not wealthy, but always hopelessly
in debt.  Towards evening he was always drunk, and he had often
been locked up after all sorts of ludicrous and disgraceful
scandals, but he was a favorite both of his comrades and his
superior officers.  On arriving at twelve o'clock from the
station at his flat, Vronsky saw, at the outer door, a hired
carriage familiar to him.  While still outside his own door, as
he rang, he heard masculine laughter, the lisp of a feminine
voice, and Petritsky's voice.  "If that's one of the villains,
don't let him in!"  Vronsky told the servant not to announce him,
and slipped quietly into the first room.  Baroness Shilton, a
friend of Petritsky's, with a rosy little face and flaxen hair,
resplendent in a lilac satin gown, and filling the whole room,
like a canary, with her Parisian chatter, sat at the round table
making coffee.  Petritsky, in his overcoat, and the cavalry
captain Kamerovsky, in full uniform, probably just come from
duty, were sitting each side of her.

"Bravo! Vronsky!" shouted Petritsky, jumping up, scraping his
chair.  "Our host himself!  Baroness, some coffee for him out of
the new coffee pot.  Why, we didn't expect you!  Hope you're
satisfied with the ornament of your study," he said, indicating
the baroness.  "You know each other, of course?"

"I should think so," said Vronsky, with a bright smile, pressing
the baroness's little hand.  "What next!  I'm an old friend."

"You're home after a journey," said the baroness, "so I'm flying.
Oh, I'll be off this minute, if I'm in the way."

"You're home, wherever you are, baroness," said Vronsky.  "How do
you do, Kamerovsky?" he added, coldly shaking hands with
Kamerovsky.

"There, you never know how to say such pretty things," said the
baroness, turning to Petritsky.

"No; what's that for?  After dinner I say things quite as good."

"After dinner there's no credit in them?  Well, then, I'll make
you some coffee, so go and wash and get ready," said the
baroness, sitting down again, and anxiously turning the screw in
the new coffee pot.  "Pierre, give me the coffee," she said,
addressing Petritsky, whom she called Pierre as a contraction of
his surname, making no secret of her relations with him.  "I'll
put it in."

"You'll spoil it!"

"No, I won't spoil it!  Well, and your wife?" said the baroness
suddenly, interrupting Vronsky's conversation with his comrade.
"We've been marrying you here.  Have you brought your wife?"

"No, baroness.  I was born a Bohemian, and a Bohemian I shall
die."

"So much the better, so much the better.  Shake hands on it."

And the baroness, detaining Vronsky, began telling him, with many
jokes, about her last new plans of life, asking his advice.

"He persists in refusing to give me a divorce! Well, what am I
to do?"  (_He_ was her husband.)  "Now I want to begin a suit
against him.  What do you advise?  Kamerovsky, look after the
coffee; it's boiling over.  You see, I'm engrossed with business!
I want a lawsuit, because I must have my property.  Do you
understand the folly of it, that on the pretext of my being
unfaithful to him," she said contemptuously, "he wants to get the
benefit of my fortune."

Vronsky heard with pleasure this light-hearted prattle of a
pretty woman, agreed with her, gave her half-joking counsel, and
altogether dropped at once into the tone habitual to him in
talking to such women.  In his Petersburg world all people were
divided into utterly opposed classes.  One, the lower class,
vulgar, stupid, and, above all, ridiculous people, who believe
that one husband ought to live with the one wife whom he has
lawfully married; that a girl should be innocent, a woman modest,
and a man manly, self-controlled, and strong; that one ought to
bring up one's children, earn one's bread, and pay one's debts;
and various similar absurdities.  This was the class of
old-fashioned and ridiculous people.  But there was another class
of people, the real people.  To this class they all belonged, and
in it the great thing was to be elegant, generous, plucky, gay,
to abandon oneself without a blush to every passion, and to laugh
at everything else.

For the first moment only, Vronsky was startled after the
impression of a quite different world that he had brought with
him from Moscow.  But immediately as though slipping his feet
into old slippers, he dropped back into the light-hearted,
pleasant world he had always lived in.

The coffee was never really made, but spluttered over every one,
and boiled away, doing just what was required of it--that is,
providing much cause for much noise and laughter, and spoiling a
costly rug and the baroness's gown.

"Well now, good-bye, or you'll never get washed, and I shall have
on my conscience the worst sin a gentleman can commit.  So you
would advise a knife to his throat?"

"To be sure, and manage that your hand may not be far from his
lips.  He'll kiss your hand, and all will end satisfactorily,"
answered Vronsky.

"So at the Francais!" and, with a rustle of her skirts, she
vanished.

Kamerovsky got up too, and Vronsky, not waiting for him to go,
shook hands and went off to his dressing room.

While he was washing, Petritsky described to him in brief
outlines his position, as far as it had changed since Vronsky had
left Petersburg.  No money at all.  His father said he wouldn't
give him any and pay his debts.  His tailor was trying to get him
locked up, and another fellow, too, was threatening to get him
locked up.  The colonel of the regiment had announced that if
these scandals did not cease he would have to leave.  As for the
baroness, he was sick to death of her, especially since she'd
taken to offering continually to lend him money.  But he had
found a girl--he'd show her to Vronsky--a marvel, exquisite, in
the strict Oriental style, "genre of the slave Rebecca, don't
you know."  He'd had a row, too, with Berkoshov, and was going to
send seconds to him, but of course it would come to nothing.
Altogether everything was supremely amusing and jolly.  And, not
letting his comrade enter into further details of his position,
Petritsky proceeded to tell him all the interesting news.  As he
listened to Petritsky's familiar stories in the familiar setting
of the rooms he had spent the last three years in, Vronsky felt a
delightful sense of coming back to the careless Petersburg life
that he was used to.

"Impossible!" he cried, letting down the pedal of the washing
basin in which he had been sousing his healthy red neck.
"Impossible!" he cried, at the news that Laura had flung over
Fertinghof and had made up to Mileev.  "And is he as stupid and
pleased as ever? Well, and how's Buzulukov?"

"Oh, there is a tale about Buzulukov--simply lovely!" cried
Petritsky.  "You know his weakness for balls, and he never misses
a single court ball.  He went to a big ball in a new helmet.
Have you seen the new helmets?  Very nice, lighter.  Well, so
he's standing....  No, I say, do listen."

"I am listening," answered Vronsky, rubbing himself with a rough
towel.

"Up comes the Grand Duchess with some ambassador or other, and,
as ill-luck would have it, she begins talking to him about the
new helmets.  The Grand Duchess positively wanted to show the new
helmet to the ambassador.  They see our friend standing there."
(Petritsky mimicked how he was standing with the helmet.) "The
Grand Duchess asked him to give her the helmet; he doesn't give
it to her.  What do you think of that?  Well, every one's winking
at him, nodding, frowning--give it to her, do!  He doesn't give
it to her.  He's mute as a fish.  Only picture it!...  Well,
the...what's his name, whatever he was...tries to take the helmet
from him...he won't give it up!...  He pulls it from him, and
hands it to the Grand Duchess.  'Here, your Highness,' says he,
'is the new helmet.'  She turned the helmet the other side up,
And--just picture it!--plop went a pear and sweetmeats out of it,
two pounds of sweetmeats!...He'd been storing them up, the
darling!"

Vronsky burst into roars of laughter.  And long afterwards, when
he was talking of other things, he broke out into his healthy
laugh, showing his strong, close rows of teeth, when he thought
of the helmet.

Having heard all the news, Vronsky, with the assistance of his
valet, got into his uniform, and went off to report himself.  He
intended, when he had done that, to drive to his brother's and to
Betsy's and to pay several visits with a view to beginning to go
into that society where he might meet Madame Karenina.  As he
always did in Petersburg, he left home not meaning to return till
late at night.





PART TWO




Chapter 1


At the end of the winter, in the Shtcherbatskys' house, a
consultation was being held, which was to pronounce on the state
of Kitty's health and the measures to be taken to restore her
failing strength.  She had been ill, and as spring came on she
grew worse.  The family doctor gave her cod liver oil, then iron,
then nitrate of silver, but as the first and the second and the
third were alike in doing no good, and as his advice when spring
came was to go abroad, a celebrated physician was called in.  The
celebrated physician, a very handsome man, still youngish, asked
to examine the patient.  He maintained, with peculiar
satisfaction, it seemed, that maiden modesty is a mere relic of
barbarism, and that nothing could be more natural than for a man
still youngish to handle a young girl naked.  He thought it
natural because he did it every day, and felt and thought, as it
seemed to him, no harm as he did it and consequently he
considered modesty in the girl not merely as a relic of
barbarism, but also as an insult to himself.

There was nothing for it but to submit, since, although all the
doctors had studied in the same school, had read the same books,
and learned the same science, and though some people said this
celebrated doctor was a bad doctor, in the princess's household
and circle it was for some reason accepted that this celebrated
doctor alone had some special knowledge, and that he alone could
save Kitty.  After a careful examination and sounding of the
bewildered patient, dazed with shame, the celebrated doctor,
having scrupulously washed his hands, was standing in the drawing
room talking to the prince.  The prince frowned and coughed,
listening to the doctor.  As a man who had seen something of
life, and neither a fool nor an invalid, he had no faith in
medicine, and in his heart was furious at the whole farce,
specially as he was perhaps the only one who fully comprehended
the cause of Kitty's illness.  "Conceited blockhead!" he thought,
as he listened to the celebrated doctor's chatter about his
daughter's symptoms.  The doctor was meantime with difficulty
restraining the expression of his contempt for this old
gentleman, and with difficulty condescending to the level of his
intelligence.  He perceived that it was no good talking to the
old man, and that the principal person in the house was the
mother.  Before her he decided to scatter his pearls.  At that
instant the princess came into the drawing room with the family
doctor.  The prince withdrew, trying not to show how ridiculous
he thought the whole performance.  The princess was distracted,
and did not know what to do.  She felt she had sinned against
Kitty.

"Well, doctor, decide our fate," said the princess.  "Tell me
everything."

"Is there hope?" she meant to say, but her lips quivered, and she
could not utter the question.  "Well, doctor?"

"Immediately, princess.  I will talk it over with my colleague,
and then I will have the honor of laying my opinion before you."

"So we had better leave you?"

"As you please."

The princess went out with a sigh.

When the doctors were left alone, the family doctor began timidly
explaining his opinion, that there was a commencement of
tuberculous trouble, but...and so on.  The celebrated doctor
listened to him, and in the middle of his sentence looked at his
big gold watch.

"Yes," said he.  "But..."

The family doctor respectfully ceased in the middle of his
observations.

"The commencement of the tuberculous process we are not, as you
are aware, able to define; till there are cavities, there is
nothing definite.  But we may suspect it.  And there are
indications; malnutrition, nervous excitability, and so on.  The
question stands thus: in presence of indications of tuberculous
process, what is to be done to maintain nutrition?"

"But, you know, there are always moral, spiritual causes at the
back in these cases," the family doctor permitted himself to
interpolate with a subtle smile.

"Yes, that's an understood thing," responded the celebrated
physician, again glancing at his watch.  "Beg pardon, is the
Yausky bridge done yet, or shall I have to drive around?" he
asked.  "Ah! it is.  Oh, well, then I can do it in twenty
minutes.  So we were saying the problem may be put thus: to
maintain nutrition and to give tone to the nerves.  The one is in
close connection with the other, one must attack both sides at
once."

"And how about a tour abroad?" asked the family doctor.

"I've no liking for foreign tours.  And take note: if there is
an early stage of tuberculous process, of which we cannot be
certain, a foreign tour will be of no use.  What is wanted is
means of improving nutrition, and not for lowering it." And the
celebrated doctor expounded his plan of treatment with Soden
waters, a remedy obviously prescribed primarily on the ground
that they could do no harm.

The family doctor listened attentively and respectfully.

"But in favor of foreign travel I would urge the change of
habits, the removal from conditions calling up reminiscences.
And then the mother wishes it," he added.

"Ah!  Well, in that case, to be sure, let them go.  Only, those
German quacks are mischievous....  They ought to be persuaded....
Well, let them go then."

He glanced once more at his watch.

"Oh! time's up already," And he went to the door.  The celebrated
doctor announced to the princess (a feeling of what was due from
him dictated his doing so) that he ought to see the patient once
more.

"What! another examination!" cried the mother, with horror.

"Oh, no, only a few details, princess."

"Come this way."

And the mother, accompanied by the doctor, went into the drawing
room to Kitty.  Wasted and flushed, with a peculiar glitter in
her eyes, left there by the agony of shame she had been put
through, Kitty stood in the middle of the room.  When the doctor
came in she flushed crimson, and her eyes filled with tears.  All
her illness and treatment struck her as a thing so stupid,
ludicrous even!  Doctoring her seemed to her as absurd as
putting together the pieces of a broken vase.  Her heart was
broken.  Why would they try to cure her with pills and powders?
But she could not grieve her mother, especially as her mother
considered herself to blame.

"May I trouble you to sit down, princess?" the celebrated doctor
said to her.

He sat down with a smile, facing her, felt her pulse, and again
began asking her tiresome questions.  She answered him, and all at
once got up, furious.

"Excuse me, doctor, but there is really no object in this.  This
is the third time you've asked me the same thing."

The celebrated doctor did not take offense.

"Nervous irritability," he said to the princess, when Kitty had
left the room.  "However, I had finished..."

And the doctor began scientifically explaining to the princess,
as an exceptionally intelligent woman, the condition of the young
princess, and concluded by insisting on the drinking of
the waters, which were certainly harmless.  At the question:
Should they go abroad? the doctor plunged into deep meditation,
as though resolving a weighty problem.  Finally his decision was
pronounced:  they were to go abroad, but to put no faith in
foreign quacks, and to apply to him in any need.

It seemed as though some piece of good fortune had come to pass
after the doctor had gone.  The mother was much more cheerful
when she went back to her daughter, and Kitty pretended to be
more cheerful.  She had often, almost always, to be pretending
now.

"Really, I'm quite well, mamma.  But if you want to go abroad,
let's go!" she said, and trying to appear interested in the
proposed tour, she began talking of the preparations for the
journey.



Chapter 2


Soon after the doctor, Dolly had arrived.  She knew that there
was to be a consultation that day, and though she was only just
up after her confinement (she had another baby, a little girl,
born at the end of the winter), though she had trouble and
anxiety enough of her own, she had left her tiny baby and a sick
child, to come and hear Kitty's fate, which was to be decided
that day.

"Well, well?" she said, coming into the drawing room, without
taking off her hat.  "You're all in good spirits.  Good news,
then?"

They tried to tell her what the doctor had said, but it appeared
that though the doctor had talked distinctly enough and at great
length, it was utterly impossible to report what he had said.
The only point of interest was that it was settled they should go
abroad.

Dolly could not help sighing.  Her dearest friend, her sister,
was going away.  And her life was not a cheerful one.  Her
relations with Stepan Arkadyevitch after their reconciliation had
become humiliating.  The union Anna had cemented turned out to be
of no solid character, and family harmony was breaking down again
at the same point.  There had been nothing definite, but Stepan
Arkadyevitch was hardly ever at home; money, too, was hardly ever
forthcoming, and Dolly was continually tortured by suspicions of
infidelity, which she tried to dismiss, dreading the agonies of
jealousy she had been through already.  The first onslaught of
jealousy, once lived through, could never come back again, and
even the discovery of infidelities could never now affect her as
it had the first time.  Such a discovery now would only mean
breaking up family habits, and she let herself be deceived,
despising him and still more herself, for the weakness.  Besides
this, the care of her large family was a constant worry to her:
first, the nursing of her young baby did not go well, then the
nurse had gone away, now one of the children had fallen ill.

"Well, how are all of you?" asked her mother.

"Ah, mamma, we have plenty of troubles of our own.  Lili is ill,
and I'm afraid it's scarlatina.  I have come here now to hear
about Kitty, and then I shall shut myself up entirely, if--God
forbid--it should be scarlatina."

The old prince too had come in from his study after the doctor's
departure, and after presenting his cheek to Dolly, and saying a
few words to her, he turned to his wife:

"How have you settled it? you're going?  Well, and what do you
mean to do with me?"

"I suppose you had better stay here, Alexander," said his wife.

"That's as you like."

"Mamma, why shouldn't father come with us?" said Kitty.  "It
would be nicer for him and for us too."

The old prince got up and stroked Kitty's hair.  She lifted her
head and looked at him with a forced smile.  It always seemed to
her that he understood her better than anyone in the family,
though he did not say much about her.  Being the youngest, she
was her father's favorite, and she fancied that his love gave him
insight.  When now her glance met his blue kindly eyes looking
intently at her, it seemed to her that he saw right through her,
and understood all that was not good that was passing within her.
Reddening, she stretched out towards him expecting a kiss, but he
only patted her hair and said:

"These stupid chignons! There's no getting at the real daughter.
One simply strokes the bristles of dead women.  Well, Dolinka,"
he turned to his elder daughter, "what's your young buck about,
hey?"

"Nothing, father," answered Dolly, understanding that her husband
was meant.  "He's always out; I scarcely ever see him," she could
not resist adding with a sarcastic smile.

"Why, hasn't he gone into the country yet--to see about selling
that forest?"

"No, he's still getting ready for the journey."

"Oh, that's it!" said the prince.  "And so am I to be getting
ready for a journey too?  At your service," he said to his wife,
sitting down.  "And I tell you what, Katia," he went on to his
younger daughter, "you must wake up one fine day and say to
yourself: Why, I'm quite well, and merry, and going out again
with father for an early morning walk in the frost.  Hey?"

What her father said seemed simple enough, yet at these words
Kitty became confused and overcome like a detected criminal.
"Yes, he sees it all, he understands it all, and in these words
he's telling me that though I'm ashamed, I must get over my
shame." She could not pluck up spirit to make any answer.  She
tried to begin, and all at once burst into tears, and rushed out
of the room.

"See what comes of your jokes!" the princess pounced down on her
husband.  "You're always..." she began a string of reproaches.

The prince listened to the princess's scolding rather a long
while without speaking, but his face was more and more frowning.

"She's so much to be pitied, poor child, so much to be pitied,
and you don't feel how it hurts her to hear the slightest
reference to the cause of it.  Ah! to be so mistaken in people!"
said the princess, and by the change in her tone both Dolly and
the prince knew she was speaking of Vronsky.  "I don't know why
there aren't laws against such base, dishonorable people."

"Ah, I can't bear to hear you!" said the prince gloomily, getting
up from his low chair, and seeming anxious to get away, yet
stopping in the doorway.  "There are laws, madam, and since
you've challenged me to it, I'll tell you who's to blame for it
all: you and you, you and nobody else.  Laws against such young
gallants there have always been, and there still are!  Yes, if
there has been nothing that ought not to have been, old as I am,
I'd have called him out to the barrier, the young dandy.  Yes,
and now you physic her and call in these quacks."

The prince apparently had plenty more to say, but as soon as the
princess heard his tone she subsided at once, and became
penitent, as she always did on serious occasions.

"Alexander, Alexander," she whispered, moving to him and
beginning to weep.

As soon as she began to cry the prince too calmed down.  He went
up to her.

"There, that's enough, that's enough!  You're wretched too, I
know.  It can't be helped.  There's no great harm done.  God is
merciful...thanks..." he said, not knowing what he was saying, as
he responded to the tearful kiss of the princess that he felt on
his hand.  And the prince went out of the room.

Before this, as soon as Kitty went out of the room in tears,
Dolly, with her motherly, family instincts, had promptly
perceived that here a woman's work lay before her, and she
prepared to do it.  She took off her hat, and, morally speaking,
tucked up her sleeves and prepared for action.  While her mother
was attacking her father, she tried to restrain her mother, so
far as filial reverence would allow.  During the prince's
outburst she was silent; she felt ashamed for her mother, and
tender towards her father for so quickly being kind again.  But
when her father left them she made ready for what was the chief
thing needful--to go to Kitty and console her.

"I'd been meaning to tell you something for a long while, mamma:
did you know that Levin meant to make Kitty an offer when he was
here the last time?  He told Stiva so."

"Well, what then? I don't understand..."

"So did Kitty perhaps refuse him?...  She didn't tell you so?"

"No, she has said nothing to me either of one or the other; she's
too proud.  But I know it's all on account of the other."

"Yes, but suppose she has refused Levin, and she wouldn't have
refused him if it hadn't been for the other, I know.  And then,
he has deceived her so horribly."

It was too terrible for the princess to think how she had sinned
against her daughter, and she broke out angrily.

"Oh, I really don't understand!  Nowadays they will all go their
own way, and mothers haven't a word to say in anything, and
then..."

"Mamma, I'll go up to her."

"Well, do.  Did I tell you not to?" said her mother.



Chapter 3


When she went into Kitty's little room, a pretty, pink little
room, full of knick-knacks in _vieux saxe,_ as fresh, and pink,
and white, and gay as Kitty herself had been two months ago,
Dolly remembered how they had decorated the room the year before
together, with what love and gaiety.  Her heart turned cold when
she saw Kitty sitting on a low chair near the door, her eyes
fixed immovably on a corner of the rug.  Kitty glanced at her
sister, and the cold, rather ill-tempered expression of her face
did not change.

"I'm just going now, and I shall have to keep in and you won't be
able to come to see me," said Dolly, sitting down beside her.  "I
want to talk to you."

"What about?" Kitty asked swiftly, lifting her head in dismay.

"What should it be, but your trouble?"

"I have no trouble."

"Nonsense, Kitty.  Do you suppose I could help knowing? I know
all about it.  And believe me, it's of so little
consequence....  We've all been through it."

Kitty did not speak, and her face had a stern expression.

"He's not worth your grieving over him," pursued Darya
Alexandrovna, coming straight to the point.

"No, because he has treated me with contempt," said Kitty, in a
breaking voice.  "Don't talk of it!  Please, don't talk of it!"

"But who can have told you so?  No one has said that.  I'm
certain he was in love with you, and would still be in love with
you, if it hadn't...

"Oh, the most awful thing of all for me is this sympathizing!"
shrieked Kitty, suddenly flying into a passion.  She turned round
on her chair, flushed crimson, and rapidly moving her fingers,
pinched the clasp of her belt first with one hand and then with
the other.  Dolly knew this trick her sister had of clenching her
hands when she was much excited; she knew, too, that in moments
of excitement Kitty was capable of forgetting herself and saying
a great deal too much, and Dolly would have soothed her, but it
was too late.

"What, what is it you want to make me feel, eh?" said Kitty
quickly.  "That I've been in love with a man who didn't care a
straw for me, and that I'm dying of love for him? And this is
said to me by my own sister, who imagines that...that...that
she's sympathizing with me!...I don't want these condolences
and humbug!"

"Kitty, you're unjust."

"Why are you tormenting me?"

"But I...quite the contrary...I see you're unhappy..."

But Kitty in her fury did not hear her.

"I've nothing to grieve over and be comforted about.  I am too
proud ever to allow myself to care for a man who does not love
me."

"Yes, I don't say so either....  Only one thing.  Tell me the
truth," said Darya Alexandrovna, taking her by the hand: "tell
me, did Levin speak to you?..."

The mention of Levin's name seemed to deprive Kitty of the last
vestige of self-control.  She leaped up from her chair, and
flinging her clasp on the ground, she gesticulated rapidly with
her hands and said:

"Why bring Levin in too? I can't understand what you want to
torment me for.  I've told you, and I say it again, that I have
some pride, and never, _never_ would I do as you're doing--go back
to a man who's deceived you, who has cared for another woman.  I
can't understand it!  You may, but I can't!"

And saying these words she glanced at her sister, and seeing that
Dolly sat silent, her head mournfully bowed, Kitty, instead of
running out of the room as she had meant to do, sat down near the
door, and hid her face in her handkerchief.

The silence lasted for two minutes: Dolly was thinking of
herself.  That humiliation of which she was always conscious came
back to her with a peculiar bitterness when her sister reminded
her of it.  She had not looked for such cruelty in her sister,
and she was angry with her.  But suddenly she heard the rustle of
a skirt, and with it the sound of heart-rending, smothered
sobbing, and felt arms about her neck.  Kitty was on her knees
before her.

"Dolinka, I am so, so wretched!" she whispered penitently.  And
the sweet face covered with tears hid itself in Darya
Alexandrovna's skirt.

As though tears were the indispensable oil, without which the
machinery of mutual confidence could not run smoothly between the
two sisters, the sisters after their tears talked, not of what
was uppermost in their minds, but, though they talked of outside
matters, they understood each other.  Kitty knew that the words
she had uttered in anger about her husband's infidelity and her
humiliating position had cut her poor sister to the heart, but
that she had forgiven her.  Dolly for her part knew all she had
wanted to find out.  She felt certain that her surmises were
correct; that Kitty's misery, her inconsolable misery, was due
precisely to the fact that Levin had made her an offer and she
had refused him, and Vronsky had deceived her, and that she was
fully prepared to love Levin and to detest Vronsky.  Kitty said
not a word of that; she talked of nothing but her spiritual
condition.

"I have nothing to make me miserable," she said, getting calmer;
"but can you understand that everything has become hateful,
loathsome, coarse to me, and I myself most of all?  You can't
imagine what loathsome thoughts I have about everything."

"Why, whatever loathsome thoughts can you have?" asked Dolly,
smiling.

"The most utterly loathsome and coarse: I can't tell you.  It's
not unhappiness, or low spirits, but much worse.  As though
everything that was good in me was all hidden away, and nothing
was left but the most loathsome.  Come, how am I to tell you?"
she went on, seeing the puzzled look in her sister's eyes.
"Father began saying something to me just now....  It seems to me
he thinks all I want is to be married.  Mother takes me to a
ball: it seems to me she only takes me to get me married off as
soon as may be, and be rid of me.  I know it's not the truth, but
I can't drive away such thoughts.  Eligible suitors, as they call
them--I can't bear to see them.  It seems to me they're taking
stock of me and summing me up.  In old days to go anywhere in a
ball dress was a simple joy to me, I admired myself; now I feel
ashamed and awkward.  And then!  The doctor....  Then..." Kitty
hesitated; she wanted to say further that ever since this change
had taken place in her, Stepan Arkadyevitch had become
insufferably repulsive to her, and that she could not see him
without the grossest and most hideous conceptions rising before
her imagination.

"Oh, well, everything presents itself to me, in the coarsest,
most loathsome light," she went on.  "That's my illness.  Perhaps
it will pass off."

"But you mustn't think about it."

"I can't help it.  I'm never happy except with the children at
your house."

"What a pity you can't be with me!"

"Oh, yes, I'm coming.  I've had scarlatina, and I'll persuade
mamma to let me."

Kitty insisted on having her way, and went to stay at her
sister's and nursed the children all through the scarlatina, for
scarlatina it turned out to be.  The two sisters brought all the
six children successfully through it, but Kitty was no better in
health, and in Lent the Shtcherbatskys went abroad.



Chapter 4


The highest Petersburg society is essentially one: in it everyone
knows everyone else, everyone even visits everyone else.  But
this great set has its subdivisions.  Anna Arkadyevna Karenina
had friends and close ties in three different circles of this
highest society.  One circle was her husband's government
official set, consisting of his colleagues and subordinates,
brought together in the most various and capricious manner, and
belonging to different social strata.  Anna found it difficult
now to recall the feeling of almost awe-stricken reverence which
she had at first entertained for these persons.  Now she knew all
of them as people know one another in a country town; she knew
their habits and weaknesses, and where the shoe pinched each one
of them.  She knew their relations with one another and with the
head authorities, knew who was for whom, and how each one
maintained his position, and where they agreed and disagreed.
But the circle of political, masculine interests had never
interested her, in spite of countess Lidia Ivanovna's influence,
and she avoided it.

Another little set with which Anna was in close relations was the
one by means of which Alexey Alexandrovitch had made his career.
The center of this circle was the Countess Lidia Ivanovna.  It
was a set made up of elderly, ugly, benevolent, and godly women,
and clever, learned, and ambitious men.  One of the clever people
belonging to the set had called it "the conscience of Petersburg
society."  Alexey Alexandrovitch had the highest esteem for this
circle, and Anna with her special gift for getting on with
everyone, had in the early days of her life in Petersburg made
friends in this circle also.  Now, since her return from Moscow,
she had come to feel this set insufferable.  It seemed to her
that both she and all of them were insincere, and she felt so
bored and ill at ease in that world that she went to see the
Countess Lidia Ivanovna as little as possible.

The third circle with which Anna had ties was preeminently the
fashionable world--the world of balls, of dinners, of sumptuous
dresses, the world that hung on to the court with one hand, so as
to avoid sinking to the level of the demi-monde.  For the
demi-monde the members of that fashionable world believed that
they despised, though their tastes were not merely similar, but
in fact identical.  Her connection with this circle was kept up
through Princess Betsy Tverskaya, her cousin's wife, who had an
income of a hundred and twenty thousand roubles, and who had
taken a great fancy to Anna ever since she first came out, showed
her much attention, and drew her into her set, making fun of
Countess Lidia Ivanovna's coterie.

"When I'm old and ugly I'll be the same," Betsy used to say; "but
for a pretty young woman like you it's early days for that house
of charity."

Anna had at first avoided as far as she could Princess
Tverskaya's world, because it necessitated an expenditure beyond
her means, and besides in her heart she preferred the first
circle.  But since her visit to Moscow she had done quite the
contrary.  She avoided her serious-minded friends, and went out
into the fashionable world.  There she met Vronsky, and
experienced an agitating joy at those meetings.  She met Vronsky
specially often at Betsy's for Betsy was a Vronsky by birth and
his cousin.  Vronsky was everywhere where he had any chance of
meeting Anna, and speaking to her, when he could, of his love.
She gave him no encouragement, but every time she met him there
surged up in her heart that same feeling of quickened life that
had come upon her that day in the railway carriage when she saw
him for the first time.  She was conscious herself that her
delight sparkled in her eyes and curved her lips into a smile,
and she could not quench the expression of this delight.

At first Anna sincerely believed that she was displeased with him
for daring to pursue her.  Soon after her return from Moscow, on
arriving at a soiree where she had expected to meet him, and not
finding him there, she realized distinctly from the rush of
disappointment that she had been deceiving herself, and that this
pursuit was not merely not distasteful to her, but that it made
the whole interest of her life.

A celebrated singer was singing for the second time, and all the
fashionable world was in the theater.  Vronsky, seeing his
cousin from his stall in the front row, did not wait till the
entr'acte, but went to her box.

"Why didn't you come to dinner?" she said to him.  "I marvel at
the second sight of lovers," she added with a smile, so that no
one but he could hear; "_she wasn't there_.  But come after the
opera."

Vronsky looked inquiringly at her.  She nodded.  He thanked her
by a smile, and sat down beside her.

"But how I remember your jeers!" continued Princess Betsy, who
took a peculiar pleasure in following up this passion to a
successful issue.  "What's become of all that? You're caught, my
dear boy."

"That's my one desire, to be caught," answered Vronsky, with his
serene, good-humored smile.  "If I complain of anything it's only
that I'm not caught enough, to tell the truth.  I begin to lose
hope."

"Why, whatever hope can you have?" said Betsy, offended on behalf
of her friend.  "_Enendons nous...._"  But in her eyes there were
gleams of light that betrayed that she understood perfectly and
precisely as he did what hope he might have.

"None whatever," said Vronsky, laughing and showing his even rows
of teeth.  "Excuse me," he added, taking an opera glass out of
her hand, and proceeding to scrutinize, over her bare shoulder,
the row of boxes facing them.  "I'm afraid I'm becoming
ridiculous."

He was very well aware that he ran no risk of being ridiculous in
the eyes of Betsy or any other fashionable people.  He was very
well aware that in their eyes the position of an unsuccessful
lover of a girl, or of any woman free to marry, might be
ridiculous.  But the position of a man pursuing a married woman,
and, regardless of everything, staking his life on drawing her
into adultery, has something fine and grand about it, and can
never be ridiculous; and so it was with a proud and gay smile
under his mustaches that he lowered the opera glass and looked at
his cousin.

"But why was it you didn't come to dinner?" she said, admiring
him.

"I must tell you about that.  I was busily employed, and doing
what, do you suppose?  I'll give you a hundred guesses, a
thousand...you'd never guess.  I've been reconciling a husband
with a man who'd insulted his wife.  Yes, really!"

"Well, did you succeed?"

"Almost."

"You really must tell me about it," she said, getting up.  "Come
to me in the next _entr'acte._"

"I can't; I'm going to the French theater."

"From Nilsson?" Betsy queried in horror, though she could not
herself have distinguished Nilsson's voice from any chorus
girl's.

"Can't help it.  I've an appointment there, all to do with my
mission of peace."

"Blessed are the peacemakers; theirs is the kingdom of heaven,'"
said Betsy, vaguely recollecting she had heard some similar
saying from someone.  "Very well, then, sit down, and tell me
what it's all about."

And she sat down again.





Chapter 5


"This is rather indiscreet, but it's so good it's an awful
temptation to tell the story," said Vronsky, looking at her with
his laughing eyes.  "I'm not going to mention any names."

"But I shall guess, so much the better."

"Well, listen: two festive young men were driving--"

"Officers of your regiment, of course?"

"I didn't say they were officers,--two young men who had been
lunching."

"In other words, drinking."

"Possibly.  They were driving on their way to dinner with a
friend in the most festive state of mind.  And they beheld a
pretty woman in a hired sledge; she overtakes them, looks round
at them, and, so they fancy anyway, nods to them and laughs.
They, of course, follow her.  They gallop at full speed.  To
their amazement, the fair one alights at the entrance of the very
house to which they were going.  The fair one darts upstairs to
the top story.  They get a glimpse of red lips under a short
veil, and exquisite little feet."

"You describe it with such feeling that I fancy you must be one
of the two."

"And after what you said, just now!  Well, the young men go in to
their comrade's; he was giving a farewell dinner.  There they
certainly did drink a little too much, as one always does at
farewell dinners.  And at dinner they inquire who lives at the
top in that house.  No one knows; only their host's valet, in
answer to their inquiry whether any 'young ladies' are living on
the top floor, answered that there were a great many of them
about there.  After dinner the two young men go into their host's
study, and write a letter to the unknown fair one.  They compose
an ardent epistle, a declaration in fact, and they carry the
letter upstairs themselves, so as to elucidate whatever might
appear not perfectly intelligible in the letter."

"Why are you telling me these horrible stories? Well?"

"They ring.  A maidservant opens the door, they hand her the
letter, and assure the maid that they're both so in love that
they'll die on the spot at the door.  The maid, stupefied,
carries in their messages.  All at once a gentleman appears with
whiskers like sausages, as red as a lobster, announces that there
is no one living in the flat except his wife, and sends them both
about their business."

"How do you know he had whiskers like sausages, as you say?"

"Ah, you shall hear.  I've just been to make peace between them."

"Well, and what then?"

"That's the most interesting part of the story.  It appears that
it's a happy couple, a government clerk and his lady.  The
government clerk lodges a complaint, and I became a mediator, and
such a mediator!...  I assure you Talleyrand couldn't hold a
candle to me."

"Why, where was the difficulty?"

"Ah, you shall hear....  We apologize in due form: we are in
despair, we entreat forgiveness for the unfortunate
misunderstanding.  The government clerk with the sausages begins
to melt, but he, too, desires to express his sentiments, and as
soon as ever he begins to express them, he begins to get hot and
say nasty things, and again I'm obliged to trot out all my
diplomatic talents.  I allowed that their conduct was bad, but I
urged him to take into consideration their heedlessness, their
youth; then, too, the young men had only just been lunching
together.  'You understand.  They regret it deeply, and beg you
to overlook their misbehavior.' The government clerk was
softened once more.  'I consent, count, and am ready to overlook
it; but you perceive that my wife--my wife's a respectable woman
--has been exposed to the persecution, and insults, and
effrontery of young upstarts, scoundrels....'  And you must
understand, the young upstarts are present all the while, and I
have to keep the peace between them.  Again I call out all my
diplomacy, and again as soon as the thing was about at an end,
our friend the government clerk gets hot and red, and his
sausages stand on end with wrath, and once more I launch out into
diplomatic wiles."

"Ah, he must tell you this story!" said Betsy, laughing, to a
lady who came into her box.  "He has been making me laugh so."

"Well, _bonne chance_!" she added, giving Vronsky one finger of the
hand in which she held her fan, and with a shrug of her shoulders
she twitched down the bodice of her gown that had worked up, so
as to be duly naked as she moved forward towards the footlights
into the light of the gas, and the sight of all eyes.

Vronsky drove to the French theater, where he really had to see
the colonel of his regiment, who never missed a single
performance there.  He wanted to see him, to report on the result
of his mediation, which had occupied and amused him for the last
three days.  Petritsky, whom he liked, was implicated in the
affair, and the other culprit was a capital fellow and first-rate
comrade, who had lately joined the regiment, the young Prince
Kedrov.  And what was most important, the interests of the
regiment were involved in it too.

Both the young men were in Vronsky's company.  The colonel of the
regiment was waited upon by the government clerk, Venden, with a
complaint against his officers, who had insulted his wife.  His
young wife, so Venden told the story--he had been married half a
year--was at church with her mother, and suddenly overcome by
indisposition, arising from her interesting condition, she could
not remain standing, she drove home in the first sledge, a
smart-looking one, she came across.  On the spot the officers set
off in pursuit of her; she was alarmed, and feeling still more
unwell, ran up the staircase home.  Venden himself, on returning
from his office, heard a ring at their bell and voices, went out,
and seeing the intoxicated officers with a letter, he had turned
them out.  He asked for exemplary punishment.

"Yes, it's all very well," said the colonel to Vronsky, whom he
had invited to come and see him.  "Petritsky's becoming
impossible.  Not a week goes by without some scandal.  This
government clerk won't let it drop, he'll go on with the thing."

Vronsky saw all the thanklessness of the business, and that there
could be no question of a duel in it, that everything must be
done to soften the government clerk, and hush the matter up.  The
colonel had called in Vronsky just because he knew him to be an
honorable and intelligent man, and, more than all, a man who
cared for the honor of the regiment.  They talked it over, and
decided that Petritsky and Kedrov must go with Vronsky to
Venden's to apologize.  The colonel and Vronsky were both fully
aware that Vronsky's name and rank would be sure to contribute
greatly to the softening of the injured husband's feelings.

And these two influences were not in fact without effect; though
the result remained, as Vronsky had described, uncertain.

On reaching the French theater, Vronsky retired to the foyer with
the colonel, and reported to him his success, or non-success.
The colonel, thinking it all over, made up his mind not to pursue
the matter further, but then for his own satisfaction proceeded
to cross-examine Vronsky about his interview; and it was a long
while before he could restrain his laughter, as Vronsky described
how the government clerk, after subsiding for a while, would
suddenly flare up again, as he recalled the details, and how
Vronsky, at the last half word of conciliation, skillfully
maneuvered a retreat, shoving Petritsky out before him.

"It's a disgraceful story, but killing.  Kedrov really can't
fight the gentleman!  Was he so awfully hot?" he commented,
laughing.  "But what do you say to Claire today?  She's
marvelous," he went on, speaking of a new French actress.
"However often you see her, every day she's different.  It's only
the French who can do that."



Chapter 6


Princess Betsy drove home from the theater, without waiting for
the end of the last act.  She had only just time to go into her
dressing room, sprinkle her long, pale face with powder, rub it,
set her dress to rights, and order tea in the big drawing room,
when one after another carriages drove up to her huge house in
Bolshaia Morskaia.  Her guests stepped out at the wide entrance,
and the stout porter, who used to read the newspapers in the
mornings behind the glass door, to the edification of the
passers-by, noiselessly opened the immense door, letting the
visitors pass by him into the house.

Almost at the same instant the hostess, with freshly arranged
coiffure and freshened face, walked in at one door and her guests
at the other door of the drawing room, a large room with dark
walls, downy rugs, and a brightly lighted table, gleaming with
the light of candles, white cloth, silver samovar, and
transparent china tea things.

The hostess sat down at the table and took off her gloves.
Chairs were set with the aid of footmen, moving almost
imperceptibly about the room; the party settled itself, divided
into two groups: one round the samovar near the hostess, the
other at the opposite end of the drawing room, round the handsome
wife of an ambassador, in black velvet, with sharply defined
black eyebrows.  In both groups conversation wavered, as it
always does, for the first few minutes, broken up by meetings,
greetings, offers of tea, and as it were, feeling about for
something to rest upon.

"She's exceptionally good as an actress; one can see she's
studied Kaulbach," said a diplomatic attache in the group round
the ambassador's wife.  "Did you notice how she fell down?..."

"Oh, please, don't let us talk about Nilsson!  No one can
possibly say anything new about her," said a fat, red-faced,
flaxen-headed lady, without eyebrows and chignon, wearing an old
silk dress.  This was Princess Myakaya, noted for her simplicity
and the roughness of her manners, and nicknamed _enfant terrible_.
Princess Myakaya, sitting in the middle between the two groups,
and listening to both, took part in the conversation first of one
and then of the other.  "Three people have used that very phrase
about Kaulbach to me today already, just as though they had made
a compact about it.  And I can't see why they liked that remark
so."

The conversation was cut short by this observation, and a new
subject had to be thought of again.

"Do tell me something amusing but not spiteful," said the
ambassador's wife, a great proficient in the art of that elegant
conversation called by the English, _small talk_.  She addressed
the attache, who was at a loss now what to begin upon.

