felt at once that not their tracks only but they themselves were
here before her, and not one, but many.  Laska slackened her
speed.  They were here, but where precisely she could not yet
determine.  To find the very spot, she began to make a circle,
when suddenly her master's voice drew her off.  "Laska! here?" he
asked, pointing her to a different direction.  She stopped,
asking him if she had better not go on doing as she had begun.
But he repeated his command in an angry voice, pointing to a spot
covered with water, where there could not be anything.  She
obeyed him, pretending she was looking, so as to please him, went
round it, and went back to her former position, and was at once
aware of the scent again.  Now when he was not hindering her, she
knew what to do, and without looking at what was under her feet,
and to her vexation stumbling over a high stump into the water,
but righting herself with her strong, supple legs, she began
making the circle which was to make all clear to her.  The scent
of them reached her, stronger and stronger, and more and more
defined, and all at once it became perfectly clear to her that
one of them was here, behind this tuft of reeds, five paces in
front of her; she stopped, and her whole body was still and
rigid.  On her short legs she could see nothing in front of her,
but by the scent she knew it was sitting not more than five paces
off.  She stood still, feeling more and more conscious of it, and
enjoying it in anticipation.  Her tail was stretched straight and
tense, and only wagging at the extreme end.  Her mouth was
slightly open, her ears raised.  One ear had been turned wrong
side out as she ran up, and she breathed heavily but warily, and
still more warily looked round, but more with her eyes than her
head, to her master.  He was coming along with the face she knew
so well, though the eyes were always terrible to her.  He
stumbled over the stump as he came, and moved, as she thought,
extraordinarily slowly.  She thought he came slowly, but he was
running.

Noticing Laska's special attitude as she crouched on the ground,
as it were, scratching big prints with her hind paws, and with
her mouth slightly open, Levin knew she was pointing at grouse,
and with an inward prayer for luck, especially with the first
bird, he ran up to her.  Coming quite close up to her, he could
from his height look beyond her, and he saw with his eyes what
she was seeing with her nose.  In a space between two little
thickets, at a couple of yards' distance, he could see a
grouse.  Turning its head, it was listening.  Then lightly
preening and folding its wings, it disappeared round a corner
with a clumsy wag of its tail.

"Fetch it, fetch it!" shouted Levin, giving Laska a shove from
behind.

"But I can't go," thought Laska.  "Where am I to go?  From here I
feel them, but if I move forward I shall know nothing of where
they are or who they are."  But then he shoved her with his knee,
and in an excited whisper said, "Fetch it, Laska."

"Well, if that's what he wishes, I'll do it, but I can't answer
for myself now," she thought, and darted forward as fast as her
legs would carry her between the thick bushes.  She scented
nothing now; she could only see and hear, without understanding
anything.

Ten paces from her former place a grouse rose with a guttural cry
and the peculiar round sound of its wings.  And immediately after
the shot it splashed heavily with its white breast on the wet
mire.  Another bird did not linger, but rose behind Levin without
the dog.  When Levin turned towards it, it was already some way
off.  But his shot caught it.  Flying twenty paces further, the
second grouse rose upwards, and whirling round like a ball,
dropped heavily on a dry place.

"Come, this is going to be some good!" thought Levin, packing the
warm and fat grouse into his game bag.  "Eh, Laska, will it be
good?"

When Levin, after loading his gun, moved on, the sun had fully
risen, though unseen behind the storm-clouds.  The moon had lost
all of its luster, and was like a white cloud in the sky.  Not a
single star could be seen.  The sedge, silvery with dew before,
now shone like gold.  The stagnant pools were all like amber.
The blue of the grass had changed to yellow-green.  The marsh
birds twittered and swarmed about the brook and upon the bushes
that glittered with dew and cast long shadows.  A hawk woke up
and settled on a haycock, turning its head from side to side and
looking discontentedly at the marsh.  Crows were flying about the
field, and a bare-legged boy was driving the horses to an old
man, who had got up from under his long coat and was combing his
hair.  The smoke from the gun was white as milk over the green of
the grass.

One of the boys ran up to Levin.

"Uncle, there were ducks here yesterday!" he shouted to him, and
he walked a little way off behind him.

And Levin was doubly pleased, in sight of the boy, who expressed
his approval, at killing three snipe, one after another, straight
off.


Chapter 13


The sportsman's saying, that if the first beast or the first bird
is not missed, the day will be lucky, turned out correct.

At ten o'clock Levin, weary, hungry, and happy after a tramp of
twenty miles, returned to his night's lodging with nineteen head
of fine game and one duck, which he tied to his belt, as it would
not go into the game bag.  His companions had long been awake,
and had had time to get hungry and have breakfast.

"Wait a bit, wait a bit, I know there are nineteen," said Levin,
counting a second time over the grouse and snipe, that looked so
much less important now, bent and dry and bloodstained, with
heads crooked aside, than they did when they were flying.

The number was verified, and Stepan Arkadyevitch's envy pleased
Levin.  He was pleased too on returning to find the man sent by
Kitty with a note was already there.

"I am perfectly well and happy.  If you were uneasy about me, you
can feel easier than ever.  I've a new bodyguard, Marya
Vlasyevna,"--this was the midwife, a new and important personage
in Levin's domestic life.  "She has come to have a look at me.
She found me perfectly well, and we have kept her till you are
back.  All are happy and well, and please, don't be in a hurry to
come back, but, if the sport is good, stay another day."

These two pleasures, his lucky shooting and the letter from his
wife, were so great that two slightly disagreeable incidents
passed lightly over Levin.  One was that the chestnut trace
horse, who had been unmistakably overworked on the previous day,
was off his feed and out of sorts.  The coachman said he was
"Overdriven yesterday, Konstantin Dmitrievitch.  Yes, indeed!
driven ten miles with no sense!"

The other unpleasant incident, which for the first minute
destroyed his good humor, though later he laughed at it a great
deal, was to find that of all the provisions Kitty had provided
in such abundance that one would have thought there was enough
for a week, nothing was left.  On his way back, tired and hungry
from shooting, Levin had so distinct a vision of meat-pies that
as he approached the hut he seemed to smell and taste them, as
Laska had smelt the game, and he immediately told Philip to give
him some.  It appeared that there were no pies left, nor even any
chicken.

"Well, this fellow's appetite!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
laughing and pointing at Vassenka Veslovsky.  "I never suffer
from loss of appetite, but he's really marvelous!..."

"Well, it can't be helped," said Levin, looking gloomily at
Veslovsky.  "Well, Philip, give me some beef, then."

"The beef's been eaten, and the bones given to the dogs,"
answered Philip.

Levin was so hurt that he said, in a tone of vexation, "You might
have left me something!" and he felt ready to cry.

"Then put away the game," he said in a shaking voice to Philip,
trying not to look at Vassenka, "and cover them with some
nettles.  And you might at least ask for some milk for me."

But when he had drunk some milk, he felt ashamed immediately at
having shown his annoyance to a stranger, and he began to laugh
at his hungry mortification.

In the evening they went shooting again, and Veslovsky had
several successful shots, and in the night they drove home.

Their homeward journey was as lively as their drive out had been.
Veslovsky sang songs and related with enjoyment his adventures
with the peasants, who had regaled him with vodka, and said to
him, "Excuse our homely ways," and his night's adventures with
kiss-in-the-ring and the servant-girl and the peasant, who had
asked him was he married, and on learning that he was not, said
to him, "Well, mind you don't run after other men's wives--you'd
better get one of your own."  These words had particularly amused
Veslovsky.

"Altogether, I've enjoyed our outing awfully.  And you, Levin?"

"I have, very much," Levin said quite sincerely.  It was
particularly delightful to him to have got rid of the hostility
he had been feeling towards Vassenka Veslovsky at home, and to
feel instead the most friendly disposition to him.



Chapter 14


Next day at ten o'clock Levin, who had already gone his rounds,
knocked at the room where Vassenka had been put for the night.

"_Entrez!_" Veslovsky called to him.  "Excuse me, I've only just
finished my ablutions," he said, smiling, standing before him in
his underclothes only.

"Don't mind me, please."  Levin sat down in the window.  "Have
you slept well?"

"Like the dead.  What sort of day is it for shooting?"

"What will you take, tea or coffee?"

"Neither.  I'll wait till lunch.  I'm really ashamed.  I suppose
the ladies are down?  A walk now would be capital.  You show me
your horses."

After walking about the garden, visiting the stable, and even
doing some gymnastic exercises together on the parallel bars,
Levin returned to the house with his guest, and went with him
into the drawing room.

"We had splendid shooting, and so many delightful experiences!"
said Veslovsky, going up to Kitty, who was sitting at the
samovar.  "What a pity ladies are cut off from these delights!"

"Well, I suppose he must say something to the lady of the house,"
Levin said to himself.  Again he fancied something in the smile,
in the all-conquering air with which their guest addressed
Kitty....

The princess, sitting on the other side of the table with Marya
Vlasyevna and Stepan Arkadyevitch, called Levin to her side, and
began to talk to him about moving to Moscow for Kitty's
confinement, and getting ready rooms for them.   Just as Levin
had disliked all the trivial preparations for his wedding, as
derogatory to the grandeur of the event, now he felt still more
offensive the preparations for the approaching birth, the date of
which they reckoned, it seemed, on their fingers.  He tried to
turn a deaf ear to these discussions of the best patterns of long
clothes for the coming baby; tried to turn away and avoid seeing
the mysterious, endless strips of knitting, the triangles of
linen, and so on, to which Dolly attached special importance.
The birth of a son (he was certain it would be a son) which was
promised him, but which he still could not believe in--so
marvelous it seemed--presented itself to his mind, on one hand,
as a happiness so immense, and therefore so incredible; on the
other, as an event so mysterious, that this assumption of a
definite knowledge of what would be, and consequent preparation
for it, as for something ordinary that did happen to people,
jarred on him as confusing and humiliating.

But the princess did not understand his feelings, and put down
his reluctance to think and talk about it to carelessness and
indifference, and so she gave him no peace.  She had commissioned
Stepan Arkadyevitch to look at a flat, and now she called Levin
up.

"I know nothing about it, princess.  Do as you think fit," he
said.

"You must decide when you will move."

"I really don't know.  I know millions of children are born away
from Moscow, and doctors...why..."

"But if so..."

"Oh, no, as Kitty wishes."

"We can't talk to Kitty about it!  Do you want me to frighten
her?  Why, this spring Natalia Golitzina died from having an
ignorant doctor."

"I will do just what you say," he said gloomily.

The princess began talking to him, but he did not hear her.
Though the conversation with the princess had indeed jarred upon
him, he was gloomy, not on account of that conversation, but from
what he saw at the samovar.

"No, it's impossible," he thought, glancing now and then at
Vassenka bending over Kitty, telling her something with his
charming smile, and at her, flushed and disturbed.

There was something not nice in Vassenka's attitude, in his eyes,
in his smile.  Levin even saw something not nice in Kitty's
attitude and look.  And again the light died away in his eyes.
Again, as before, all of a sudden, without the slightest
transition, he felt cast down from a pinnacle of happiness,
peace, and dignity, into an abyss of despair, rage, and
humiliation.  Again everything and everyone had become hateful to
him.

"You do just as you think best, princess," he said again, looking
round.

"Heavy is the cap of Monomach," Stepan Arkadyevitch said
playfully, hinting, evidently, not simply at the princess's
conversation, but at the cause of Levin's agitation, which he had
noticed.

"How late you are today, Dolly!"

Everyone got up to greet Darya Alexandrovna.  Vassenka only rose
for an instant, and with the lack of courtesy to ladies
characteristic of the modern young man, he scarcely bowed, and
resumed his conversation again, laughing at something.

"I've been worried about Masha.  She did not sleep well, and is
dreadfully tiresome today," said Dolly.

The conversation Vassenka had started with Kitty was running on
the same lines as on the previous evening, discussing Anna, and
whether love is to be put higher than worldly considerations.
Kitty disliked the conversation, and she was disturbed both by
the subject and the tone in which it was conducted, and also by
the knowledge of the effect it would have on her husband.  But
she was too simple and innocent to know how to cut short this
conversation, or even to conceal the superficial pleasure
afforded her by the young man's very obvious admiration.  She
wanted to stop it, but she did not know what to do.  Whatever she
did she knew would be observed by her husband, and the worst
interpretation put on it.  And, in fact, when she asked Dolly
what was wrong with Masha, and Vassenka, waiting till this
uninteresting conversation was over, began to gaze indifferently
at Dolly, the question struck Levin as an unnatural and
disgusting piece of hypocrisy.

"What do you say, shall we go and look for mushrooms today?" said
Dolly.

"By all means, please, and I shall come too," said Kitty, and she
blushed.  She wanted from politeness to ask Vassenka whether he
would come, and she did not ask him.  "Where are you going,
Kostya?" she asked her husband with a guilty face, as he passed
by her with a resolute step.  This guilty air confirmed all his
suspicions.

"The mechanician came when I was away; I haven't seen him yet,"
he said, not looking at her.

He went downstairs, but before he had time to leave his study he
heard his wife's familiar footsteps running with reckless speed
to him.

"What do you want?" he said to her shortly.  "We are busy."

"I beg your pardon," she said to the German mechanician; "I want
a few words with my husband."

The German would have left the room, but Levin said to him:

"Don't disturb yourself."

"The train is at three?" queried the German.  "I mustn't be
late."

Levin did not answer him, but walked out himself with his wife.

"Well, what have you to say to me?" he said to her in French.

He did not look her in the face, and did not care to see that she
in her condition was trembling all over, and had a piteous,
crushed look.

"I...I want to say that we can't go on like this; that this
is misery..." she said.

"The servants are here at the sideboard," he said angrily; "don't
make a scene."

"Well, let's go in here!"

They were standing in the passage.  Kitty would have gone into
the next room, but there the English governess was giving Tanya a
lesson.

"Well, come into the garden."

In the garden they came upon a peasant weeding the path.  And no
longer considering that the peasant could see her tear-stained
and his agitated face, that they looked like people fleeing from
some disaster, they went on with rapid steps, feeling that they
must speak out and clear up misunderstandings, must be alone
together, and so get rid of the misery they were both feeling.

"We can't go on like this! It's misery! I am wretched; you are
wretched.  What for?" she said, when they had at last reached a
solitary garden seat at a turn in the lime tree avenue.

"But tell me one thing: was there in his tone anything unseemly,
not nice, humiliatingly horrible?" he said, standing before her
again in the same position with his clenched fists on his chest,
as he had stood before her that night.

"Yes," she said in a shaking voice; "but, Kostya, surely you see
I'm not to blame?  All the morning I've been trying to take a
tone...but such people ...Why did he come?  How happy we were!"
she said, breathless with the sobs that shook her.

Although nothing had been pursuing them, and there was nothing to
run away from, and they could not possibly have found anything
very delightful on that garden seat, the gardener saw with
astonishment that they passed him on their way home with
comforted and radiant faces.



Chapter 15


After escorting his wife upstairs, Levin went to Dolly's part of
the house.  Darya Alexandrovna, for her part, was in great
distress too that day.  She was walking about the room, talking
angrily to a little girl, who stood in the corner roaring.

"And you shall stand all day in the corner, and have your dinner
all alone, and not see one of your dolls, and I won't make you a
new frock," she said, not knowing how to punish her.

"Oh, she is a disgusting child!" she turned to Levin.  "Where
does she get such wicked propensities?"

"Why, what has she done?" Levin said without much interest, for
he had wanted to ask her advice, and so was annoyed that he had
come at an unlucky moment.

"Grisha and she went into the raspberries, and there...I can't
tell you really what she did.  It's a thousand pities Miss
Elliot's not with us.  This one sees to nothing--she's a
machine....  _Figurez-vous que la petite_?..."

And Darya Alexandrovna described Masha's crime.

"That proves nothing; it's not a question of evil propensities at
all, it's simply mischief," Levin assured her.

"But you are upset about something?  What have you come for?"
asked Dolly.  "What's going on there?"

And in the tone of her question Levin heard that it would be easy
for him to say what he had meant to say.

"I've not been in there, I've been alone in the garden with
Kitty.  We've had a quarrel for the second time since...Stiva
came."

Dolly looked at him with her shrewd, comprehending eyes.

"Come, tell me, honor bright, has there been...not in Kitty, but
in that gentleman's behavior, a tone which might be unpleasant--
not unpleasant, but horrible, offensive to a husband?"

"You mean, how shall I say....  Stay, stay in the corner!" she
said to Masha, who, detecting a faint smile in her mother's face,
had been turning round.  "The opinion of the world would be that
he is behaving as young men do behave.  _Il fait la cour à une
jeune et jolie femme_, and a husband who's a man of the world
should only be flattered by it."

"Yes, yes," said Levin gloomily; "but you noticed it?"

"Not only I, but Stiva noticed it.  Just after breakfast he said
to me in so many words, _Je crois que Veslovsky fait un petit brin
de cour à Kitty_."

"Well, that's all right then; now I'm satisfied.  I'll send him
away," said Levin.

"What do you mean!  Are you crazy?" Dolly cried in horror;
"nonsense, Kostya, only think!" she said, laughing.  "You can go
now to Fanny," she said to Masha.  "No, if you wish it, I'll
speak to Stiva.  He'll take him away.  He can say you're
expecting visitors.  Altogether he doesn't fit into the house."

"No, no, I'll do it myself."

"But you'll quarrel with him?"

"Not a bit.  I shall so enjoy it," Levin said, his eyes flashing
with real enjoyment.  "Come, forgive her, Dolly, she won't do it
again," he said of the little sinner, who had not gone to Fanny,
but was standing irresolutely before her mother, waiting and
looking up from under her brows to catch her mother's eye.

The mother glanced at her.  The child broke into sobs, hid her
face on her mother's lap, and Dolly laid her thin, tender hand on
her head.

"And what is there in common between us and him?" thought Levin,
and he went off to look for Veslovsky.

As he passed through the passage he gave orders for the carriage
to be got ready to drive to the station.

"The spring was broken yesterday," said the footman.

"Well, the covered trap, then, and make haste.  Where's the
visitor?"

"The gentleman's gone to his room."

Levin came upon Veslovsky at the moment when the latter, having
unpacked his things from his trunk, and laid out some new songs,
was putting on his gaiters to go out riding.

Whether there was something exceptional in Levin's face, or that
Vassenka was himself conscious that _ce petit brin de cour_ he was
making was out of place in this family, but he was somewhat (as
much as a young man in society can be) disconcerted at Levin's
entrance.

"You ride in gaiters?"

"Yes, it's much cleaner," said Vassenka, putting his fat leg on a
chair, fastening the bottom hook, and smiling with simple-hearted
good humor.

He was undoubtedly a good-natured fellow, and Levin felt sorry
for him and ashamed of himself, as his host, when he saw the shy
look on Vassenka's face.

On the table lay a piece of stick which they had broken together
that morning, trying their strength.  Levin took the fragment in
his hands and began smashing it up, breaking bits off the stick,
not knowing how to begin.

"I wanted...."  He paused, but suddenly, remembering Kitty and
everything that had happened, he said, looking him resolutely in
the face: "I have ordered the horses to be put-to for you."

"How so?" Vassenka began in surprise.  "To drive where?"

"For you to drive to the station," Levin said gloomily.

"Are you going away, or has something happened?"

"It happens that I expect visitors," said Levin, his strong
fingers more and more rapidly breaking off the ends of the split
stick.  "And I'm not expecting visitors, and nothing has
happened, but I beg you to go away.  You can explain my rudeness
as you like."

Vassenka drew himself up.

"I beg you to explain..." he said with dignity, understanding at
last.

"I can't explain," Levin said softly and deliberately, trying to
control the trembling of his jaw; "and you'd better not ask."

And as the split ends were all broken off, Levin clutched the
thick ends in his finger, broke the stick in two, and carefully
caught the end as it fell.

Probably the sight of those nervous fingers, of the muscles he
had proved that morning at gymnastics, of the glittering eyes,
the soft voice, and quivering jaws, convinced Vassenka better
than any words.  He bowed, shrugging his shoulders, and smiling
contemptuously.

"Can I not see Oblonsky?"

The shrug and the smile did not irritate Levin.

"What else was there for him to do?" he thought.

"I'll send him to you at once."

"What madness is this?" Stepan Arkadyevitch said when, after
hearing from his friend that he was being turned out of the
house, he found Levin in the garden, where he was walking about
waiting for his guest's departure.  "_Mais c'est ridicule!_  What
fly has stung you?  _Mais c'est du dernier ridicule!_  What did you
think, if a young man..."

But the place where Levin had been stung was evidently still
sore, for he turned pale again, when Stepan Arkadyevitch would
have enlarged on the reason, and he himself cut him short.

"Please don't go into it!  I can't help it.  I feel ashamed of
how I'm treating you and him.  But it won't be, I imagine, a
great grief to him to go, and his presence was distasteful to me
and to my wife."

"But it's insulting to him!  _Et puis c'est ridicule_."

"And to me it's both insulting and distressing!  And I'm not at
fault in any way, and there's no need for me to suffer."

"Well, this I didn't expect of you!  _On peut être jaloux, mais
à ce point, c'est du dernier ridicule!_"

Levin turned quickly, and walked away from him into the depths of
the avenue, and he went on walking up and down alone.  Soon he
heard the rumble of the trap, and saw from behind the trees how
Vassenka, sitting in the hay (unluckily there was no seat in the
trap) in his Scotch cap, was driven along the avenue, jolting up
and down over the ruts.

"What's this?" Levin thought, when a footman ran out of the house
and stopped the trap.  It was the mechanician, whom Levin had
totally forgotten.  The mechanician, bowing low, said something
to Veslovsky, then clambered into the trap, and they drove off
together.

Stepan Arkadyevitch and the princess were much upset by Levin's
action.  And he himself felt not only in the highest degree
_ridicule_, but also utterly guilty and disgraced.  But remembering
what sufferings he and his wife had been through, when he asked
himself how he should act another time, he answered that he
should do just the same again.

In spite of all this, towards the end of that day, everyone
except the princess, who could not pardon Levin's action, became
extraordinarily lively and good humored, like children after a
punishment or grown-up people after a dreary, ceremonious
reception, so that by the evening Vassenka's dismissal was spoken
of, in the absence of the princess, as though it were some remote
event.  And Dolly, who had inherited her father's gift of
humorous storytelling, made Varenka helpless with laughter as she
related for the third and fourth time, always with fresh humorous
additions, how she had only just put on her new shoes for the
benefit of the visitor, and on going into the drawing room, heard
suddenly the rumble of the trap.  And who should be in the trap
but Vassenka himself, with his Scotch cap, and his songs and his
gaiters, and all, sitting in the hay.

"If only you'd ordered out the carriage!  But no! and then I
hear: 'Stop!'  Oh, I thought they've relented.  I look out, and
behold a fat German being sat down by him and driving away....
And my new shoes all for nothing!..."



Chapter 16


Darya Alexandrovna carried out her intention and went to see
Anna.  She was sorry to annoy her sister and to do anything Levin
disliked.  She quite understood how right the Levins were in not
wishing to have anything to do with Vronsky.  But she felt she
must go and see Anna, and show her that her feelings could not be
changed, in spite of the change in her position.  That she might
be independent of the Levins in this expedition, Darya
Alexandrovna sent to the village to hire horses for the drive;
but Levin learning of it went to her to protest.

"What makes you suppose that I dislike your going?  But, even if
I did dislike it, I should still more dislike your not taking my
horses," he said.  "You never told me that you were going for
certain.  Hiring horses in the village is disagreeable to me,
and, what's of more importance, they'll undertake the job and
never get you there.  I have horses.  And if you don't want to
wound me, you'll take mine."

Darya Alexandrovna had to consent, and on the day fixed Levin had
ready for his sister-in-law a set of four horses and relays,
getting them together from the farm- and saddle-horses--not at
all a smart-looking set, but capable of taking Darya Alexandrovna
the whole distance in a single day.  At that moment, when horses
were wanted for the princess, who was going, and for the midwife,
it was a difficult matter for Levin to make up the number, but
the duties of hospitality would not let him allow Darya
Alexandrovna to hire horses when staying in his house.  Moreover,
he was well aware that the twenty roubles that would be asked for
the journey were a serious matter for her; Darya Alexandrovna's
pecuniary affairs, which were in a very unsatisfactory state,
were taken to heart by the Levins as if they were their own.

Darya Alexandrovna, by Levin's advice, started before daybreak.
The road was good, the carriage comfortable, the horses trotted
along merrily, and on the box, besides the coachman, sat the
counting-house clerk, whom Levin was sending instead of a groom
for greater security.  Darya Alexandrovna dozed and waked up only
on reaching the inn where the horses were to be changed.

After drinking tea at the same well-to-do peasant's with whom
Levin had stayed on the way to Sviazhsky's, and chatting with the
women about their children, and with the old man about Count
Vronsky, whom the latter praised very highly, Darya Alexandrovna,
at ten o'clock, went on again.  At home, looking after her
children, she had no time to think.  So now, after this journey
of four hours, all the thoughts she had suppressed before rushed
swarming into her brain, and she thought over all her life as she
never had before, and from the most different points of view.
Her thoughts seemed strange even to herself.  At first she
thought about the children, about whom she was uneasy, although
the princess and Kitty (she reckoned more upon her) had promised
to look after them.  "If only Masha does not begin her naughty
tricks, if Grisha isn't kicked by a horse, and Lily's stomach
isn't upset again!" she thought.  But these questions of the
present were succeeded by questions of the immediate future.  She
began thinking how she had to get a new flat in Moscow for the
coming winter, to renew the drawing room furniture, and to make
her elder girl a cloak.  Then questions of the more remote future
occurred to her: how she was to place her children in the world.
"The girls are all right," she thought; "but the boys?"

"It's very well that I'm teaching Grisha, but of course that's
only because I am free myself now, I'm not with child.  Stiva,
of course, there's no counting on.  And with the help of
good-natured friends I can bring them up; but if there's another
baby coming?..."  And the thought struck her how untruly it was
said that the curse laid on woman was that in sorrow she should
bring forth children.

"The birth itself, that's nothing; but the months of carrying the
child--that's what's so intolerable," she thought, picturing to
herself her last pregnancy, and the death of the last baby.  And
she recalled the conversation she had just had with the young
woman at the inn.  On being asked whether she had any children,
the handsome young woman had answered cheerfully:

"I had a girl baby, but God set me free; I buried her last Lent."

"Well, did you grieve very much for her?" asked Darya
Alexandrovna.

"Why grieve?  The old man has grandchildren enough as it is.  It
was only a trouble.  No working, nor nothing.  Only a tie."

This answer had struck Darya Alexandrovna as revolting in spite
of the good-natured and pleasing face of the young woman; but now
she could not help recalling these words.  In those cynical words
there was indeed a grain of truth.

"Yes, altogether," thought Darya Alexandrovna, looking back over
her whole existence during those fifteen years of her married
life, "pregnancy, sickness, mental incapacity, indifference to
everything, and most of all--hideousness.  Kitty, young and
pretty as she is, even Kitty has lost her looks; and I when I'm
with child become hideous, I know it.  The birth, the agony, the
hideous agonies, that last moment...then the nursing, the
sleepless nights, the fearful pains...."

Darya Alexandrovna shuddered at the mere recollection of the pain
from sore breasts which she had suffered with almost every child.
"Then the children's illnesses, that everlasting apprehension;
then bringing them up; evil propensities" (she thought of little
Masha's crime among the raspberries), "education, Latin--it's all
so incomprehensible and difficult.  And on the top of it all, the
death of these children."  And there rose again before her
imagination the cruel memory, that always tore her mother's
heart, of the death of her last little baby, who had died of
croup; his funeral, the callous indifference of all at the little
pink coffin, and her own torn heart, and her lonely anguish at
the sight of the pale little brow with its projecting temples,
and the open, wondering little mouth seen in the coffin at the
moment when it was being covered with the little pink lid with a
cross braided on it.

"And all this, what's it for?  What is to come of it all?  That
I'm  wasting my life, never having a moment's peace, either with
child, or nursing a child, forever irritable, peevish, wretched
myself and worrying others, repulsive to my husband, while the
children are growing up unhappy, badly educated, and penniless.
Even now, if it weren't for spending the summer at the Levins',
I don't know how we should be managing to live.  Of course Kostya
and Kitty have so much tact that we don't feel it; but it can't
go on.  They'll have children, they won't be able to keep us;
it's a drag on them as it is.  How is papa, who has hardly
anything left for himself, to help us?  So that I can't even
bring the children up by myself, and may find it hard with the
help of other people, at the cost of humiliation.  Why, even if
we suppose the greatest good luck, that the children don't die,
and I bring them up somehow.  At the very best they'll simply be
decent people.  That's all I can hope for.  And to gain simply
that--what agonies, what toil!...  One's whole life ruined!"
Again she recalled what the young peasant woman had said, and
again she was revolted at the thought; but she could not help
admitting that there was a grain of brutal truth in the words.

"Is it far now, Mihail?" Darya Alexandrovna asked the
counting house clerk, to turn her mind from thoughts that were
frightening her.

"From this village, they say, it's five miles."  The carriage
drove along the village street and onto a bridge.  On the bridge
was a crowd of peasant women with coils of ties for the sheaves
on their shoulders, gaily and noisily chattering.  They stood
still on the bridge, staring inquisitively at the carriage.  All
the faces turned to Darya Alexandrovna looked to her healthy and
happy, making her envious of their enjoyment of life.  "They're
all living, they're all enjoying life," Darya Alexandrovna still
mused when she had passed the peasant women and was driving
uphill again at a trot, seated comfortably on the soft springs of
the old carriage, "while I, let out, as it were from prison, from
the world of worries that fret me to death, am only looking about
me now for an instant.  They all live; those peasant women and my
sister Natalia and Varenka and Anna, whom I am going to see--all,
but not I.

"And they attack Anna.  What for? am I any better?  I have,
anyway, a husband I love--not as I should like to love him, still
I do love him, while Anna never loved hers.  How is she to blame?
She wants to live.  God has put that in our hearts.  Very likely
I should have done the same.  Even to this day I don't feel sure
I did right in listening to her at that terrible time when she
came to me in Moscow.  I ought then to have cast off my husband
and have begun my life fresh.  I might have loved and have been
loved in reality.  And is it any better as it is?  I don't
respect him.  He's necessary to me," she thought about her
husband, "and I put up with him.  Is that any better?  At that
time I could still have been admired, I had beauty left me
still," Darya Alexandrovna pursued her thoughts, and she would
have liked to look at herself in the looking glass.  She had a
traveling looking glass in her handbag, and she wanted to take
it out; but looking at the backs of the coachman and the swaying
counting house clerk, she felt that she would be ashamed if
either of them were to look round, and she did not take out the
glass.

But without looking in the glass, she thought that even now it
was not too late; and she thought of Sergey Ivanovitch, who was
always particularly attentive to her, of Stiva's good-hearted
friend, Turovtsin, who had helped her nurse her children through
the scarlatina, and was in love with her.  And there was someone
else, a quite young man, who--her husband had told her it as a
joke--thought her more beautiful than either of her sisters.  And
the most passionate and impossible romances rose before Darya
Alexandrovna's imagination.  "Anna did quite right, and certainly
I shall never reproach her for it.  She is happy, she makes
another person happy, and she's not broken down as I am, but most
likely just as she always was, bright, clever, open to every
impression," thought Darya Alexandrovna,--and a sly smile curved
her lips, for, as she pondered on Anna's love affair, Darya
Alexandrovna constructed on parallel lines an almost identical
love affair for herself, with an imaginary composite figure, the
ideal man who was in love with her.  She, like Anna, confessed
the whole affair to her husband.  And the amazement and
perplexity of Stepan Arkadyevitch at this avowal made her smile.

In such daydreams she reached the turning of the highroad that
led to Vozdvizhenskoe.



Chapter 17


The coachman pulled up his four horses and looked round to the
right, to a field of rye, where some peasants were sitting on a
cart.  The counting house clerk was just going to jump down, but
on second thoughts he shouted peremptorily to the peasants
instead, and beckoned to them to come up.  The wind, that seemed
to blow as they drove, dropped when the carriage stood still;
gadflies settled on the steaming horses that angrily shook them
off.  The metallic clank of a whetstone against a scythe, that
came to them from the cart, ceased.  One of the peasants got up
and came towards the carriage.

"Well, you are slow!" the counting house clerk shouted angrily to
the peasant who was stepping slowly with his bare feet over the
ruts of the rough dry road.  "Come along, do!"

A curly-headed old man with a bit of bast tied round his hair,
and his bent back dark with perspiration, came towards the
carriage, quickening his steps, and took hold of the mud-guard
with his sunburnt hand.

"Vozdvizhenskoe, the manor house? the count's?" he repeated; "go
on to the end of this track.  Then turn to the left.  Straight
along the avenue and you'll come right upon it.  But whom do you
want?  The count himself?"

"Well, are they at home, my good man?" Darya Alexandrovna said
vaguely, not knowing how to ask about Anna, even of this peasant.

"At home for sure," said the peasant, shifting from one bare foot
to the other, and leaving a distinct print of five toes and a
heel in the dust.  "Sure to be at home," he repeated, evidently
eager to talk.  "Only yesterday visitors arrived.  There's a
sight of visitors come.  What do you want?"  He turned round and
called to a lad, who was shouting something to him from the cart.
"Oh!  They all rode by here not long since, to look at a reaping
machine.  They'll be home by now.  And who will you be belonging
to?..."

"We've come a long way," said the coachman, climbing onto the
box.  "So it's not far?"

"I tell you, it's just here.  As soon as you get out..." he said,
keeping hold all the while of the carriage.

A healthy-looking, broad-shouldered young fellow came up too.

"What, is it laborers they want for the harvest?" he asked.

"I don't know, my boy."

"So you keep to the left, and you'll come right on it," said the
peasant, unmistakably loth to let the travelers go, and eager to
converse.

The coachman started the horses, but they were only just turning
off when the peasant shouted: "Stop!  Hi, friend!  Stop!" called
the two voices.  The coachman stopped.

"They're coming!  They're yonder!" shouted the peasant.  "See
what a turn-out!" he said, pointing to four persons on horseback,
and two in a _char-à-banc_, coming along the road.

They were Vronsky with a jockey, Veslovsky and Anna on horseback,
and Princess Varvara and Sviazhsky in the _char-à-banc_.  They had
gone out to look at the working of a new reaping machine.

When the carriage stopped, the party on horseback were coming at
a walking pace.  Anna was in front beside Veslovsky.  Anna,
quietly walking her horse, a sturdy English cob with cropped mane
and short tail, her beautiful head with her black hair straying
loose under her high hat, her full shoulders, her slender waist
in her black riding habit, and all the ease and grace of her
deportment, impressed Dolly.

For the first minute it seemed to her unsuitable for Anna to be
on horseback.  The conception of riding on horseback for a lady
was, in Darya Alexandrovna's mind, associated with ideas of
youthful flirtation and frivolity, which, in her opinion, was
unbecoming in Anna's position.  But when she had scrutinized her,
seeing her closer, she was at once reconciled to her riding.  In
spite of her elegance, everything was so simple, quiet, and
dignified in the attitude, the dress and the movements of Anna,
that nothing could have been more natural.

Beside Anna, on a hot-looking gray cavalry horse, was Vassenka
Veslovsky in his Scotch cap with floating ribbons, his stout
legs stretched out in front, obviously pleased with his own
appearance.  Darya Alexandrovna could not suppress a good-humored
smile as she recognized him.  Behind rode Vronsky on a dark bay
mare, obviously heated from galloping.  He was holding her in,
pulling at the reins.

After him rode a little man in the dress of a jockey.  Sviazhsky
and Princess Varvara in a new _char-à-banc_ with a big, raven-black
trotting horse, overtook the party on horseback.

Anna's face suddenly beamed with a joyful smile at the instant
when, in the little figure huddled in a corner of the old
carriage, she recognized Dolly.  She uttered a cry, started in
the saddle, and set her horse into a gallop.  On reaching the
carriage she jumped off without assistance, and holding up her
riding habit, she ran up to greet Dolly.

"I thought it was you and dared not think it.  How delightful!
You can't fancy how glad I am!" she said, at one moment pressing
her face against Dolly and kissing her, and at the next holding
her off and examining her with a smile.

"Here's a delightful surprise, Alexey!" she said, looking round
at Vronsky, who had dismounted, and was walking towards them.

Vronsky, taking off his tall gray hat, went up to Dolly.

"You wouldn't believe how glad we are to see you," he said,
giving peculiar significance to the words, and showing his strong
white teeth in a smile.

Vassenka Veslovsky, without getting off his horse, took off his
cap and greeted the visitor by gleefully waving the ribbons over
his head.

"That's Princess Varvara," Anna said in reply to a glance of
inquiry from Dolly as the _char-à-banc_ drove up.

"Ah!" said Darya Alexandrovna, and unconsciously her face
betrayed her dissatisfaction.

Princess Varvara was her husband's aunt, and she had long known
her, and did not respect her.  She knew that Princess Varvara had
passed her whole life toadying on her rich relations, but that
she should now be sponging on Vronsky, a man who was nothing to
her, mortified Dolly on account of her kinship with her husband.
Anna noticed Dolly's expression, and was disconcerted by it.  She
blushed, dropped her riding habit, and stumbled over it.

Darya Alexandrovna went up to the _char-à-banc_ and coldly greeted
Princess Varvara.  Sviazhsky too she knew.  He inquired how his
queer friend with the young wife was, and running his eyes over
the ill-matched horses and the carriage with its patched
mud-guards, proposed to the ladies that they should get into the
_char-à-banc_.

"And I'll get into this vehicle," he said.  "The horse is quiet,
and the princess drives capitally."

"No, stay as you were," said Anna, coming up, "and we'll go in
the carriage," and taking Dolly's arm, she drew her away.

Darya Alexandrovna's eyes were fairly dazzled by the elegant
carriage of a pattern she had never seen before, the splendid
horses, and the elegant and gorgeous people surrounding her.  But
what struck her most of all was the change that had taken place
in Anna, whom she knew so well and loved.  Any other woman, a
less close observer, not knowing Anna before, or not having
thought as Darya Alexandrovna had been thinking on the road,
would not have noticed anything special in Anna.  But now Dolly
was struck by that temporary beauty, which is only found in
women during the moments of love, and which she saw now in Anna's
face.  Everything in her face, the clearly marked dimples in her
cheeks and chin, the line of her lips, the smile which, as it
were, fluttered about her face, the brilliance of her eyes, the
grace and rapidity of her movements, the fulness of the notes of
her voice, even the manner in which, with a sort of angry
friendliness, she answered Veslovsky when he asked permission to
get on her cob, so as to teach it to gallop with the right leg
foremost--it was all peculiarly fascinating, and it seemed as if
she were herself aware of it, and rejoicing in it.

When both the women were seated in the carriage, a sudden
embarrassment came over both of them.  Anna was disconcerted by
the intent look of inquiry Dolly fixed upon her.  Dolly was
embarrassed because after Sviazhsky's phrase about "this
vehicle," she could not help feeling ashamed of the dirty old
carriage in which Anna was sitting with her.  The coachman Philip
and the counting house clerk were experiencing the same
sensation.  The counting house clerk, to conceal his confusion,
busied himself settling the ladies, but Philip the coachman
became sullen, and was bracing himself not to be overawed in
future by this external superiority.  He smiled ironically,
looking at the raven horse, and was already deciding in his own
mind that this smart trotter in the _char-à-banc_ was only good for
_promenade_, and wouldn't do thirty miles straight off in the heat.

The peasants had all got up from the cart and were inquisitively
and mirthfully staring at the meeting of the friends, making
their comments on it.

"They're pleased, too; haven't seen each other for a long while,"
said the curly-headed old man with the bast round his hair.

"I say, Uncle Gerasim, if we could take that raven horse now, to
cart the corn, that 'ud be quick work!"

"Look-ee!  Is that a woman in breeches?" said one of them,
pointing to Vassenka Veslovsky sitting in a side saddle.

"Nay, a man! See how smartly he's going it!"

"Eh, lads! seems we're not going to sleep, then?"

"What chance of sleep today!" said the old man, with a sidelong
look at the sun.  "Midday's past, look-ee!  Get your hooks, and
come along!"



Chapter 18


Anna looked at Dolly's thin, care-worn face, with its wrinkles
filled with dust from the road, and she was on the point of
saying what she was thinking, that is, that Dolly had got
thinner.  But, conscious that she herself had grown handsomer,
and that Dolly's eyes were telling her so, she sighed and began
to speak about herself.

"You are looking at me," she said, "and wondering how I can be
happy in my position?  Well! it's shameful to confess, but I...
I'm inexcusably happy.  Something magical has happened to me,
like a dream, when you're frightened, panic-stricken, and all of
a sudden you wake up and all the horrors are no more.  I have
waked up.  I have lived through the misery, the dread, and now
for a long while past, especially since we've been here, I've
been so happy!..." she said, with a timid smile of inquiry
looking at Dolly.

"How glad I am!" said Dolly smiling, involuntarily speaking more
coldly than she wanted to.  "I'm very glad for you.  Why haven't
you written to me?"

"Why?...  Because I hadn't the courage....  You forget my
position..."

"To me?  Hadn't the courage?  If you knew how I...I look at..."

Darya Alexandrovna wanted to express her thoughts of the morning,
but for some reason it seemed to her now out of place to do so.

"But of that we'll talk later.  What's this, what are all these
buildings?" she asked, wanting to change the conversation and
pointing to the red and green roofs that came into view behind
the green hedges of acacia and lilac.  "Quite a little town."

But Anna did not answer.

"No, no!  How do you look at my position, what do you think of
it?" she asked.

"I consider..." Darya Alexandrovna was beginning, but at that
instant Vassenka Veslovsky, having brought the cob to gallop with
the right leg foremost, galloped past them, bumping heavily up
and down in his short jacket on the chamois leather of the
side saddle.  "He's doing it, Anna Arkadyevna!" he shouted.

Anna did not even glance at him; but again it seemed to Darya
Alexandrovna out of place to enter upon such a long conversation
in the carriage, and so she cut short her thought.

"I don't think anything," she said, "but I always loved you, and
if one loves anyone, one loves the whole person, just as they
are and not as one would like them to be...."

Anna, taking her eyes off her friend's face and dropping her
eyelids (this was a new habit Dolly had not seen in her before),
pondered, trying to penetrate the full significance of the words.
And obviously interpreting them as she would have wished, she
glanced at Dolly.

"If you had any sins," she said, "they would all be forgiven you
for your coming to see me and these words."

And Dolly saw that tears stood in her eyes.  She pressed Anna's
hand in silence.

"Well, what are these buildings?  How many there are of them!"
After a moment's silence she repeated her question.

"These are the servants' houses, barns, and stables," answered
Anna.  "And there the park begins.  It had all gone to ruin, but
Alexey had everything renewed.  He is very fond of this place,
and, what I never expected, he has become intensely interested in
looking after it.  But his is such a rich nature!  Whatever he
takes up, he does splendidly.  So far from being bored by it, he
works with passionate interest.  He--with his temperament as I
know it--he has become careful and businesslike, a first-rate
manager, he positively reckons every penny in his management of
the land.  But only in that.  When it's a question of tens of
thousands, he doesn't think of money."  She spoke with that
gleefully sly smile with which women often talk of the secret
characteristics only known to them--of those they love.  "Do you
see that big building? that's the new hospital.  I believe it
will cost over a hundred thousand; that's his hobby just now.
And do you know how it all came about?  The peasants asked him
for some meadowland, I think it was, at a cheaper rate, and he
refused, and I accused him of being miserly.  Of course it was
not really because of that, but everything together, he began
this hospital to prove, do you see, that he was not miserly about
money.  _C'est une petitesse_, if you like, but I love him all the
more for it.  And now you'll see the house in a moment.  It was
his grandfather's house, and he has had nothing changed outside."

"How beautiful!" said Dolly, looking with involuntary admiration
at the handsome house with columns, standing out among the
different-colored greens of the old trees in the garden.

"Isn't it fine?  And from the house, from the top, the view is
wonderful."

They drove into a courtyard strewn with gravel and bright with
flowers, in which two laborers were at work putting an edging of
stones round the light mould of a flower bed, and drew up in a
covered entry.

"Ah, they're here already!" said Anna, looking at the saddle
horses, which were just being led away from the steps.  "It is a
nice horse, isn't it?  It's my cob; my favorite.  Lead him here
and bring me some sugar.  Where is the count?" she inquired of
two smart footmen who darted out.  "Ah, there he is!" she said,
seeing Vronsky coming to meet her with Veslovsky.

"Where are you going to put the princess?" said Vronsky in
French, addressing Anna, and without waiting for a reply, he once
more greeted Darya Alexandrovna, and this time he kissed her
hand.  "I think the big balcony room."

"Oh, no, that's too far off!  Better in the corner room, we shall
see each other more.  Come, let's go up," said Anna, as she gave
her favorite horse the sugar the footman had brought her.

"_Et vous oubliez votre devoir_," she said to Veslovsky, who came
out too on the steps.

"_Pardon, j'en ai tout plein les poches_," he answered, smiling,
putting his fingers in his waistcoat pocket.

"_Mais vous venez trop tard_," she said, rubbing her handkerchief
on her hand, which the horse had made wet in taking the sugar.

Anna turned to Dolly.  "You can stay some time?  For one day
only?  That's impossible!"

"I promised to be back, and the children..." said Dolly, feeling
embarrassed both because she had to get her bag out of the
carriage, and because she knew her face must be covered with
dust.

"No, Dolly, darling!...  Well, we'll see.  Come along, come
along!" and Anna led Dolly to her room.

That room was not the smart guest chamber Vronsky had suggested,
but the one of which Anna had said that Dolly would excuse it.
And this room, for which excuse was needed, was more full of
luxury than any in which Dolly had ever stayed, a luxury that
reminded her of the best hotels abroad.

"Well, darling, how happy I am!" Anna said, sitting down in her
riding habit for a moment beside Dolly.  "Tell me about all of
you.  Stiva I had only a glimpse of, and he cannot tell one
about the children.  How is my favorite, Tanya?  Quite a big
girl, I expect?"

"Yes, she's very tall," Darya Alexandrovna answered shortly,
surprised herself that she should respond so coolly about her
children.  "We are having a delightful stay at the Levins'," she
added.

"Oh, if I had known," said Anna, "that you do not despise me!...
You might have all come to us.  Stiva's an old friend and a great
friend of Alexey's, you know," she added, and suddenly she
blushed.

"Yes, but we are all..." Dolly answered in confusion.

"But in my delight I'm talking nonsense.  The one thing, darling,
is that I am so glad to have you!" said Anna, kissing her again.
"You haven't told me yet how and what you think about me, and I
keep wanting to know.  But I'm glad you will see me as I am.
The chief thing I shouldn't like would be for people to imagine I
want to prove anything.  I don't want to prove anything; I
merely want to live, to do no one harm but myself.  I have the
right to do that, haven't I?  But it is a big subject, and we'll
talk over everything properly later.  Now I'll go and dress and
send a maid to you."



Chapter 19


Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna, with a good housewife's eye,
scanned her room.  All she had seen in entering the house and
walking through it, and all she saw now in her room, gave her an
impression of wealth and sumptuousness and of that modern
European luxury of which she had only read in English novels, but
had never seen in Russia and in the country.  Everything was new
from the new French hangings on the walls to the carpet which
covered the whole floor.  The bed had a spring mattress, and a
special sort of bolster and silk pillowcases on the little
pillows.  The marble washstand, the dressing table, the little
sofa, the tables, the bronze clock on the chimney piece, the
window curtains, and the _portières_ were all new and expensive.

The smart maid, who came in to offer her services, with her hair
done up high, and a gown more fashionable than Dolly's, was as
new and expensive as the whole room.  Darya Alexandrovna liked
her neatness, her deferential and obliging manners, but she felt
ill at ease with her.  She felt ashamed of her seeing the patched
dressing jacket that had unluckily been packed by mistake for
her.  She was ashamed of the very patches and darned places of
which she had been so proud at home.  At home it had been so
clear that for six dressing jackets there would be needed
twenty-four yards of nainsook at sixteen pence the yard, which
was a matter of thirty shillings besides the cutting-out and
making, and these thirty shillings had been saved.  But before
the maid she felt, if not exactly ashamed, at least
uncomfortable.

Darya Alexandrovna had a great sense of relief when Annushka,
whom she had known for years, walked in.  The smart maid was sent
for to go to her mistress, and Annushka remained with Darya
Alexandrovna.

Annushka was obviously much pleased at that lady's arrival, and
began to chatter away without a pause.  Dolly observed that she
was longing to express her opinion in regard to her mistress's
position, especially as to the love and devotion of the count to
Anna Arkadyevna, but Dolly carefully interrupted her whenever she
began to speak about this.

"I grew up with Anna Arkadyevna; my lady's dearer to me than
anything.  Well, it's not for us to judge.  And, to be sure,
there seems so much love..."

"Kindly pour out the water for me to wash now, please," Darya
Alexandrovna cut her short.

"Certainly.  We've two women kept specially for washing small
things, but most of the linen's done by machinery.  The count
goes into everything himself.  Ah, what a husband!..."

Dolly was glad when Anna came in, and by her entrance put a stop
to Annushka's gossip.

Anna had put on a very simple batiste gown.  Dolly scrutinized
that simple gown attentively.  She knew what it meant, and the
price at which such simplicity was obtained.

"An old friend," said Anna of Annushka.

Anna was not embarrassed now.  She was perfectly composed and at
ease.  Dolly saw that she had now completely recovered from the
impression her arrival had made on her, and had assumed that
superficial, careless tone which, as it were, closed the door on
that compartment in which her deeper feelings and ideas were
kept.

"Well, Anna, and how is your little girl?" asked Dolly.

"Annie?"  (This was what she called her little daughter Anna.)
"Very well.  She has got on wonderfully.  Would you like to see
her?  Come, I'll show her to you.  We had a terrible bother," she
began telling her, "over nurses.  We had an Italian wet-nurse.  A
good creature, but so stupid!  We wanted to get rid of her, but
the baby is so used to her that we've gone on keeping her still."

"But how have you managed?..."  Dolly was beginning a question
as to what name the little girl would have; but noticing a sudden
frown on Anna's face, she changed the drift of her question.

"How did you manage? have you weaned her yet?"

But Anna had understood.

"You didn't mean to ask that?  You meant to ask about her
surname.  Yes?  That worries Alexey.  She has no name--that is,
she's a Karenina," said Anna, dropping her eyelids till nothing
could be seen but the eyelashes meeting.  "But we'll talk about
all that later," her face suddenly brightening.  "Come, I'll show
you her.  _Elle est tres gentille_.  She crawls now."

In the nursery the luxury which had impressed Dolly in the whole
house struck her still more.  There were little go-carts ordered
from England, and appliances for learning to walk, and a sofa
after the fashion of a billiard table, purposely constructed for
crawling, and swings and baths, all of special pattern, and
modern.  They were all English, solid, and of good make, and
obviously very expensive.  The room was large, and very light and
lofty.

When they went in, the baby, with nothing on but her little smock,
was sitting in a little elbow chair at the table, having her
dinner of broth, which she was spilling all over her little chest.
The baby was being fed, and the Russian nursery maid was
evidently sharing her meal.  Neither the wet-nurse nor the
head nurse were there; they were in the next room, from which
came the sound of their conversation in the queer French which
was their only means of communication.

Hearing Anna's voice, a smart, tall, English nurse with a
disagreeable face and a dissolute expression walked in at the
door, hurriedly shaking her fair curls, and immediately began to
defend herself though Anna had not found fault with her.  At
every word Anna said, the English nurse said hurriedly several
times, "Yes, my lady."

The rosy baby with her black eyebrows and hair, her sturdy red
little body with tight goose-flesh skin, delighted Darya
Alexandrovna in spite of the cross expression with which she
stared at the stranger.  She positively envied the baby's healthy
appearance.  She was delighted, too, at the baby's crawling.  Not
one of her own children had crawled like that.  When the baby was
put on the carpet and its little dress tucked up behind, it was
wonderfully charming.  Looking round like some little wild animal
at the grown-up big people with her bright black eyes, she
smiled, unmistakably pleased at their admiring her, and holding
her legs sideways, she pressed vigorously on her arms, and
rapidly drew her whole back up after, and then made another step
forward with her little arms.
