rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great House, by Stanley J. Weyman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Great House

Author: Stanley J. Weyman

Release Date: March 28, 2012 [EBook #39294]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT HOUSE ***




Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (University of Michigan)











Transcriber's Notes:

   1. Page scan source:
      http://www.archive.org/details/greathouseastor00weymgoog
      (University of Michigan)

   2. The diphthong oe is represented by [oe].






                           THE GREAT HOUSE






                          BY THE SAME AUTHOR

       THE HOUSE OF THE WOLF
       THE NEW RECTOR
       THE STORY OF FRANCIS CLUDDE
       A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE
       THE MAN IN BLACK
       UNDER THE RED ROBE
       MY LADY ROTHA
       MEMOIRS OF A MINISTER OF FRANCE
       THE RED COCKADE
       SHREWSBURY
       THE CASTLE INN
       SOPHIA
       COUNT HANNIBAL
       IN KINGS' BYWAYS
       THE LONG NIGHT
       THE ABBESS OF VLAYE
       STARVECROW FARM
       CHIPPINGE
       LAID UP IN LAVENDER
       THE WILD GEESE






                           THE GREAT HOUSE




                                  BY

                          STANLEY J. WEYMAN

               Author of "The Castle Inn," "Chippinge,"
                 "A Gentleman of France," etc., etc.





                               NEW YORK
                       LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.
                    FOURTH AVENUE AND 30th STREET
                                 1919






                           Copyright, 1919
                                  BY
                          STANLEY J. WEYMAN






                               CONTENTS


   CHAPTER

         I. The Hôtel Lambert--Upstairs.

        II. The Hôtel Lambert--Downstairs.

       III. The Lawyer Abroad.

        IV. Homeward Bound.

         V. The London Packet.

        VI. Field and Forge.

       VII. Mr. John Audley.

      VIII. The Gatehouse.

        IX. Old Things.

         X. New Things.

        XI. Tact and Temper.

       XII. The Yew Walk.

      XIII. Peter Pauper.

       XIV. The Manchester Men.

        XV. Strange Bedfellows.

       XVI. The Great House at Beaudelays.

      XVII. To the Rescue.

     XVIII. Masks and Faces.

       XIX. The Corn Law Crisis.

        XX. Peter's Return.

       XXI. Toft at the Butterflies.

      XXII. My Lord Speaks.

     XXIII. Blore Under Weaver.

      XXIV. An Agent of the Old School.

       XXV. Mary is Lonely.

      XXVI. Missing.

     XXVII. A Footstep in the Hall.

    XXVIII. The News from Riddsley.

      XXIX. The Audley Bible.

       XXX. A Friend in Need.

      XXXI. Ben Bosham.

     XXXII. Mary Makes a Discovery.

    XXXIII. The Meeting at the Maypole.

     XXXIV. By the Canal.

      XXXV. My Lord Speaks Out.

     XXXVI. The Riddsley Election.

    XXXVII. A Turn of the Wheel.

   XXXVIII. Toft's Little Surprise.

     XXXIX. The Deed of Renunciation.

        XL. "Let Us Make Others Thankful."






                           THE GREAT HOUSE




                              CHAPTER I

                     THE HÔTEL LAMBERT--UPSTAIRS


On an evening in March in the 'forties of last century a girl looked
down on the Seine from an attic window on the Ile St. Louis. The
room behind her--or beside her, for she sat on the window-ledge, with
her back against one side of the opening and her feet against the
other--was long, whitewashed from floor to ceiling, lighted by five
gaunt windows, and as cold to the eye as charity to the recipient.
Along each side of the chamber ran ten pallet beds. A black door broke
the wall at one end, and above the door hung a crucifix. A painting of
a Station of the Cross adorned the wall at the other end. Beyond this
picture the room had no ornament; it is almost true to say that beyond
what has been named it had no furniture. One bed--the bed beside the
window at which the girl sat--was screened by a thin curtain which did
not reach the floor. This was her bed.

But in early spring no window in Paris looked on a scene more cheerful
than this window; which as from an eyrie commanded a shining reach of
the Seine bordered by the lawns and foliage of the King's Garden, and
closed by the graceful arches of the Bridge of Austerlitz. On the
water boats shot to and fro. The quays were gay with the red trousers
of soldiers and the coquettish caps of soubrettes, with students in
strange cloaks, and the twin kling wheels of yellow cabriolets. The
first swallows were hawking hither and thither above the water, and a
pleasant hum rose from the Boulevard Bourdon.

Yet the girl sighed. For it was her birthday, she was twenty this
twenty-fifth of March, and there was not a soul in the world to know
this and to wish her joy. A life of dependence, toned to the key of
the whitewashed room and the thin pallets, lay before her; and though
she had good reason to be thankful for the safety which dependence
bought, still she was only twenty, and springtime, viewed from prison
windows, beckons to its cousin, youth. She saw family groups walking
the quays, and father, mother, children, all, seen from a distance,
were happy. She saw lovers loitering in the garden or pacing to and
fro, and romance walked with every one of them; none came late, or
fell to words. She sighed more deeply; and on the sound the door
opened.

"_Hola!_" cried a shrill voice, speaking in French, fluent, but oddly
accented. "Who is here? The Princess desires that the English
Mademoiselle will descend this evening."

"Very good," the girl in the window replied pleasantly. "At the same
hour, Joséphine?"

"Why not, Mademoiselle?" A trim maid, with a plain face and the
faultless figure of a Pole, came a few steps into the room. "But you
are alone?"

"The children are walking. I stayed at home."

"To be alone? As if I did not understand that! To be alone--it is the
luxury of the rich."

The girl nodded. "None but a Pole would have thought of that," she
said.

"Ah, the crafty English Miss!" the maid retorted. "How she flatters!
Perhaps she needs a touch of the tongs to-night? Or the loan of a pair
of red-heeled shoes, worn no more than thrice by the Princess--and
with the black which is convenable for Mademoiselle, oh, so neat! Of
the _ancien régime_, absolutely!"

The other laughed. "The _ancien régime_, Joséphine--and this!" she
replied, with a gesture that embraced the room, the pallets, her own
bed. "A curled head--and this! You are truly a cabbage----"

"But Mademoiselle descends!"

"A cabbage of--foolishness!"

"Ah, well, if I descended, you would see," the maid retorted. "I am
but the Princess's second maid, and I know nothing! But if I descended
it would not be to this dormitory I should return! Nor to the
tartines! Nor to the daughters of Poland! Trust me for that--and I
know but my prayers. While Mademoiselle, she is an artist's daughter."

"There spoke the Pole again," the girl struck in with a smile.

"The English Miss knows how to flatter," Joséphine laughed. "That is
one for the touch of the tongs," she continued, ticking them off on
her fingers. "And one for the red-heeled shoes. And--but no more! Let
me begone before I am bankrupt!" She turned about with a flirt of her
short petticoats, but paused and looked back, with her hand on the
door. "None the less, mark you well, Mademoiselle, from the whitewash
to the ceiling of Lebrun, from the dortoir of the Jeunes Filles to the
Gallery of Hercules, there are but twenty stairs, and easy, oh, so
easy to descend! If Mademoiselle instead of flattering Joséphine, the
Cracovienne, flattered some pretty gentleman--who knows? Not I! I know
but my prayers!" And with a light laugh the maid clapped to the door
and was gone.

The girl in the window had not throughout the parley changed her pose
or moved more than her head, and this was characteristic of her. For
even in her playfulness there was gravity, and a measure of stillness.
Now, left alone, she dropped her feet to the floor, turned, and knelt
on the sill with her brow pressed against the glass. The sun had set,
mists were rising from the river, the quays were gray and cold. Here
and there a lamp began to shine through the twilight. But the girl's
thoughts were no longer on the scene beneath her eyes.

"There goes the third who has been good to me," she pondered. "First
the Polish lodger who lived on the floor below, and saved me from that
woman. Then the Princess's daughter. Now Joséphine. There are still
kind people in the world--God grant that I may not forget it! But how
much better to give than to take, to be strong than to be weak, to be
the mistress and not the puppet of fortune! How much better--and, were
I a man, how easy!"

But on that there came into her remembrance one to whom it had not
been easy, one who had signally failed to master fortune, or to
grapple with circumstances. "Poor father!" she whispered.




                              CHAPTER II

                    THE HÔTEL LAMBERT--DOWNSTAIRS


When ladies were at home to their intimates in the Paris of the
'forties, they seated their guests about large round tables with a
view to that common exchange of wit and fancy which is the French
ideal. The mode crossed to England, and in many houses these round
tables, fallen to the uses of the dining-room or the nursery, may
still be seen. But when the Princess Czartoriski entertained in the
Hôtel Lambert, under the ceiling painted by Lebrun, which had looked
down on the arm-chair of Madame de Châtelet and the tabouret of
Voltaire, she was, as became a Pole, a law to herself. In that
beautiful room, softly lit by wax candles, her guests were free to
follow their bent, to fall into groups, or to admire at their ease the
Watteaus and Bouchers which the Princess's father-in-law, old Prince
Adam, had restored to their native panels.

Thanks to his taste and under her rule the gallery of Hercules
presented on this evening a scene not unworthy of its past. The
silks and satins of the old régime were indeed replaced by the
high-shouldered coats, the stocks, the pins and velvet vests of the
dandies; and Thiers beaming through his glasses, or Lamartine, though
beauty, melted by the woes of Poland, hung upon his lips, might have
been thought by some unequal to the dead. But they were now what those
had been; and the women peacocked it as of old. At any rate the effect
was good, and a guest who came late, and paused a moment on the
threshold to observe the scene, thought that he had never before done
the room full justice. Presently the Princess saw him and he went
forward. The man who was talking to her made his bow, and she pointed
with her fan to the vacant place. "Felicitations, my lord," she said.
She held out her gloved hand.

"A thousands thanks," he said, as he bent over it. "But on what,
Princess?"

"On the success of a friend. On what we have all seen in the
_Journal_. Is it not true that you have won your suit?"

"I won, yes." He shrugged his shoulders. "But what, Madame? A bare
title, an empty rent-roll."

"For shame!" she answered. "But I suppose that this is your English
phlegm. Is it not a thing to be proud of--an old title? That which
money cannot buy and the wisest would fain wear? M. Guizot, what would
he not give to be Chien de Race? Your Peel, also?"

"And your Thiers?" he returned, with a sly glance at the little man in
the shining glasses.

"He, too! But he has the passion of humanity, which is a title in
itself. Whereas you English, turning in your unending circle, one out,
one in, one in, one out, are but playing a game--marking time! You
have not a desire to go forward!"

"Surely, Princess, you forget our Reform Bill, scarce ten years old."

"Which bought off your cotton lords and your fat bourgeois, and left
the people without leaders and more helpless than before. No, my lord,
if your Russell--Lord John, do you call him?--had one jot of M.
Thiers' enthusiasm! Or your Peel--but I look for nothing there!"

He shrugged his shoulders. "I admit," he said, "that M. Thiers has an
enthusiasm beyond the ordinary."

"You do? Wonderful!"

"But," with a smile, "it is, I fancy, an enthusiasm of which the
object is--M. Thiers!"

"Ah!" she cried, fanning herself more quickly. "Now there spoke not
Mr. Audley, the attaché--he had not been so imprudent! But--how do you
call yourself now?"

"On days of ceremony," he replied, "Lord Audley of Beaudelays."

"There spoke my lord, unattached! Oh, you English, you have no
enthusiasm. You have only traditions. Poor were Poland if her fate
hung on you!"

"There are still bright spots," he said slyly. And his glance returned
to the little statesman in spectacles on whom the Princess rested the
hopes of Poland.

"No!" she cried vividly. "Don't say it again or I shall be displeased.
Turn your eyes elsewhere. There is one here about whom I wish to
consult you. Do you see the tall girl in black who is engaged with the
miniatures?"

"I saw her some time ago."

"I suppose so. You are a man. I dare say you would call her handsome?"

"I think it possible, were she not in this company. What of her,
Princess?"

"Do you notice anything beyond her looks?"

"The picture is plain--for the frame in which I see her. Is she one of
the staff of your school?"

"Yes, but with an air----"

"Certainly--an air!" He nodded.

"Well, she is a countrywoman of yours and has a history. Her father, a
journalist, artist, no matter what, came to live in Paris years ago.
He went down, down, always down; six months ago he died. There was
enough to bury him, no more. She says, I don't know"--the Princess
indicated doubt with a movement of her fan--"that she wrote to friends
in England. Perhaps she did not write; how do I know? She was at the
last sou, the street before her, a hag of a concierge behind, and
withal--as you see her."

"Not wearing that dress, I presume?" he said with a faint smile.

"No. She had passed everything to the Mont de Piété; she had what she
stood up in--yet herself! Then a Polish family on the floor below, to
whom my daughter carried alms, told Cécile of her. They pitied her,
spoke well of her, she had done--no matter what for them--perhaps
nothing. Probably nothing. But Cécile ascended, saw her, became
enamoured, _enragée!_ You know Cécile--for her all that wears feathers
is of the angels! Nothing would do but she must bring her here and set
her to teach English to the daughters during her own absence."

"The Princess is away?"

"For four weeks. But in three days she returns, and you see where I
am. How do I know who this is? She may be this, or that. If she were
French, if she were Polish, I should know! But she is English and of a
calm, a reticence--ah!"

"And of a pride too," he replied thoughtfully, "if I mistake not. Yet
it is a good face, Princess."

She fluttered her fan. "It is a handsome one. For a man that is the
same."

"With all this you permit her to appear?"

"To be of use. And a little that she may be seen by some English
friend, who may tell me."

"Shall I talk to her?"

"If you will be so good. Learn, if you please, what she is."

"Your wishes are law," he rejoined. "Will you present me?"

"It is not necessary," the Princess answered. She beckoned to a stout
gentleman who wore whiskers trimmed à la mode du Roi, and had laurel
leaves on his coat collar. "A thousand thanks."

He lingered a moment to take part in the Princess's reception of the
Academician. Then he joined a group about old Prince Adam Czartoriski,
who was describing a recent visit to Cracow, that last morsel of free
Poland, soon to pass into the maw of Austria. A little apart, the girl
in black bent over the case of miniatures, comparing some with a list,
and polishing others with a square of silk. Presently he found himself
beside her. Their eyes met.

"I am told," he said, bowing, "that you are my countrywoman. The
Princess thought that I might be of use to you."

The girl had read his errand before he spoke and a shade flitted
across her face. She knew, only too well, that her hold on this rock
of safety to which chance had lifted her--out of a gulf of peril and
misery of which she trembled to think--was of the slightest. Early,
almost from the first, she had discovered that the Princess's
benevolence found vent rather in schemes for the good of many than in
tenderness for one. But hitherto she had relied on the daughter's
affection, and a little on her own usefulness. Then, too, she was
young and hopeful, and the depths from which she had escaped were such
that she could not believe that Providence would return her to them.

But she was quick-witted, and his opening frightened her. She guessed
at once that she was not to be allowed to await Cécile's return, that
her fate hung on what this Englishman, so big and bland and forceful,
reported of her.

She braced herself to meet the danger. "I am obliged to the Princess,"
she said. "But my ties with England are slight. I came to France with
my father when I was ten years old."

"I think you lost him recently?" He found his task less easy than it
should have been.

"He died six months ago," she replied, regarding him gravely. "His
illness left me without means. I was penniless, when the young
Princess befriended me and gave me a respite here. I am no part of
this," with a glance at the salon and the groups about them. "I teach
upstairs. I am thankful for the privilege of doing so."

"The Princess told me as much," he said frankly. "She thought that,
being English, I might advise you better than she could; that possibly
I might put you in touch with your relations?"

She shook her head.

"Or your friends? You must have friends?"

"Doubtless my father had--once," she said in a low voice. "But as his
means diminished, he saw less and less of those who had known him. For
the last two years I do not think that he saw an Englishman at home.
Before that time I was in a convent school, and I do not know."

"You are a Roman Catholic, then?"

"No. And for that reason--and for another, that my account was not
paid"--her color rose painfully to her face--"I could not apply to the
Sisters. I am very frank," she added, her lip trembling.

"And I encroach," he answered, bowing. "Forgive me! Your father was an
artist, I believe?"

"He drew for an Atelier de Porcelaine--for the journals when he could.
But he was not very successful," she continued reluctantly. "The china
factory which had employed him since he came to Paris, failed. When I
returned from school he was alone and poor, living in the little
street in the Quartier, where he died."

"But forgive me, you must have some relations in England?"

"Only one of whom I know," she replied. "My father's brother. My
father had quarrelled with him--bitterly, I fear; but when he was
dying he bade me write to my uncle and tell him how we were placed. I
did so. No answer came. Then after my father's death I wrote again. I
told my uncle that I was alone, that I was without money, that in a
short time I should be homeless, that if I could return to England I
could live by teaching French. He did not reply. I could do no more."

"That was outrageous," he answered, flushing darkly. Though well under
thirty he was a tall man and portly, with one of those large faces
that easily become injected. "Do you know--is your uncle also in
narrow circumstances?"

"I know no more than his name," she said. "My father never spoke of
him. They had quarrelled. Indeed, my father spoke little of his past."

"But when you did not hear from your uncle, did you not tell your
father?"

"It could do no good," she said. "And he was dying."

He was not sentimental, this big man, whose entrance into a room
carried with it a sense of power. Nor was he one to be lightly moved,
but her simplicity and the picture her words drew for him of the
daughter and the dying man touched him. Already his mind was made up
that the Czartoriski should not turn her adrift for lack of a word.
Aloud, "The Princess did not tell me your name," he said. "May I know
it?"

"Audley," she said. "Mary Audley."

He stared at her. She supposed that he had not caught the name. She
repeated it.

"Audley? Do you really mean that?"

"Why not?" she asked, surprised in her turn. "Is it so uncommon a
name?"

"No," he replied slowly. "No, but it is a coincidence. The Princess
did not tell me that your name was Audley."

The girl shook her head. "I doubt if she knows," she said. "To her I
am only 'the English girl.'"

"And your father was an artist, resident in Paris? And his name?"

"Peter Audley."

He nodded. "Peter Audley," he repeated. His eyes looked through her at
something far away. His lips were more firmly set. His face was grave.
"Peter Audley," he repeated softly. "An artist resident in Paris!"

"But did you know him?" she cried.

He brought his thoughts and his eyes back to her. "No, I did not know
him," he said. "But I have heard of him." And again it was plain that
his thoughts took wing. "John Audley's brother, the artist!" he
muttered.

In her impatience she could have taken him by the sleeve and shaken
him. "Then you do know John Audley?" she said. "My uncle?"

Again he brought himself back with an effort. "A thousand pardons!" he
said. "You see the Princess did not tell me that you were an Audley.
Yes, I know John Audley--of the Gatehouse. I suppose it was to him you
wrote?"

"Yes."

"And he did not reply?"

She nodded.

He laughed, as at something whimsical. It was not a kindly laugh, it
jarred a little on his listener. But the next moment his face
softened, he smiled at her, and the smile of such a man had its
importance, for in repose his eyes were hard. It was clear to her that
he was a man of position, that he belonged of right to this keen
polished world at which she was stealing a glance. His air was
distinguished, and his dress, though quiet, struck the last note of
fashion.

"But I am keeping you in suspense," he said. "I must tell you, Miss
Audley, why it surprised me to learn your name. Because I, too, am an
Audley."

"You!" she cried.

"Yes, I," he replied. "What is more, I am akin to you. The kinship is
remote, but it happens that your father's name, in its place in a
pedigree, has been familiar to me of late, and I could set down the
precise degree of cousinship in which you stand to me. I think your
father was my fourth cousin."

She colored charmingly. "Is it possible?" she exclaimed.

"It is a fact, proved indeed, recently, in a court of law," he
answered lightly. "Perhaps it is as well that we have that warrant for
a conversation which I can see that the Princess thinks long. After
this she will expect to hear the whole of your history."

"I fear that she may be displeased," the girl said, wincing a little.
"You have been very kind----"

"Who should be kind," he replied, "if not the head of your family? But
have no fear, I will deal with the Princess. I shall be able to
satisfy her, I have no doubt."

"And you"--she looked at him with appeal in her eyes--"will you be
good enough to tell me who you are?"

"I am Lord Audley. To distinguish me from another of the same name, I
am called Audley of Beaudelays."

"Of Beaudelays?" she repeated. He thought her face, her whole bearing,
singularly composed in view of his announcement. "Beaudelays?" she
repeated thoughtfully. "I have heard the name more than once. Perhaps
from my father."

"It were odd if you had not," he said. "It is the name of my house,
and your uncle, John Audley, lives within a mile of it."

"Oh," she said. The name of the uncle who had ignored her appeals fell
on her like a cold douche.

"I will not say more now," Lord Audley continued. "But you shall hear
from me. To--morrow I quit Paris for three or four days, but when I
return have no fear. You may leave the matter in my hands in full
confidence that I shall not fail--my cousin."

He held out his hand and she laid hers in it. She looked him frankly
in the face. "Thank you," she said. "I little thought when I descended
this evening that I should meet a kinsman."

"And a friend," he answered, holding her hand a little longer than was
needful.

"And a friend," she repeated. "But there--I must go now. I should have
disappeared ten minutes ago. This is my way." She inclined her head,
and turning from him she pushed open a small door masked by a picture.
She passed at once into a dark corridor, and threading its windings
gained the great staircase.

As she flitted upwards from floor to floor, skirting a long procession
of shadowy forms, and now ogled by a Leda whose only veil was the
dusk, now threatened by the tusks of the great boar at bay, she
was not conscious of thought or surprise. It was not until she had
lighted her taper outside the dormitory door, and, passing between the
rows of sleeping children, had gained her screened corner, that she
found it possible to think. Then she set the light in her tiny
washing-basin--such was the rule--and seated herself on her bed. For
some minutes she stared before her, motionless and unwinking, her
hands clasped about her knees, her mind at work.

Was it true, or a dream? Had this really happened to her since she had
viewed herself in the blurred mirror, had set a curl right and,
satisfied, had turned to go down? The danger and the delivery from it,
the fear and the friend in need? Or was it a Cinderella's treat, which
no fairy godmother would recall to her, with which no lost slipper
would connect her? She could almost believe this. For no Cinderella,
in the ashes of the hearth, could have seemed more remote from the gay
ball-room than she crouching on her thin mattress, with the breathing
of the children in her ears, from the luxury of the famous salon.

Or, if it was true, if it had happened, would anything come of it?
Would Lord Audley remember her? Or would he think no more of her,
ignoring to-morrow the poor relation whom it had been the whim of the
moment to own? That would be cruel! That would be base! But if Mary
had fallen in with some good people since her father's death, she had
also met many callous, and a few cruel people. He might be one. And
then, how strange it was that her father had never named this great
kinsman, never referred to him, never even, when dying, disclosed his
name!

The light wavered in the draught that stole through the bald, undraped
window. A child whimpered in its sleep, awoke, began to sob. It was
the youngest of the daughters of Poland. The girl rose, and going on
tip-toe to the child, bent over it, kissed it, warmed it in her bosom,
soothed it. Presently the little waif slept again, and Mary Audley
began to make ready for bed.

But so much turned for her on what had happened, so much hung in the
balance, that it was not unnatural that as she let down her hair and
plaited it in two long tails for the night, she should see her new
kinsman's face in the mirror. Nor strange that as she lay sleepless
and thought-ridden in her bed the same face should present itself anew
relieved against the background of darkness.




                             CHAPTER III

                          THE LAWYER ABROAD


Half an hour later Lord Audley paused in the hall at Meurice's, and
having given his cloak and hat to a servant went thoughtfully up the
wide staircase. He opened the door of a room on the first floor. A
stout man with a bald head, who had been for some time yawning over
the dying fire, rose to his feet and remained standing.

Audley nodded. "Hallo, Stubbs!" he said carelessly, "not in bed yet?"

"No, my lord," the other answered. "I waited to learn if your lordship
had any orders for England."

"Well, sit down now. I've something to tell you." My lord stooped as
he spoke and warmed his hands at the embers; then rising, he stood
with his back to the hearth. The stout man sat forward on his
chair with an air of deference. His double chin rested on the ample
folds of a soft white stock secured by a gold pin in the shape of a
wheat-sheaf. He wore black knee-breeches and stockings, and his dress,
though plain, bore the stamp of neatness and prosperity.

For a minute or two Audley continued to look thoughtfully before him.
At length, "May I take it that this claim is really at an end now?" he
said. "Is the decision final, I mean?"

"Unless new evidence crops up," Stubbs answered--he was a lawyer--"the
decision is certainly final. With your lordship's signature to the
papers I brought over----"

"But the claimant might try again?"

"Mr. John Audley might do anything," Stubbs returned. "I believe him
to be mad upon the point, and therefore capable of much. But he could
only move on new evidence of the most cogent nature. I do not believe
that such evidence exists."

His employer weighed this for some time. At length, "Then if you were
in my place," he said, "you would not be tempted to hedge?"

"To hedge?" the lawyer exclaimed, as if he had never heard the word
before. "I am afraid I don't understand."

"I will explain. But first, tell me this. If anything happens to me
before I have a child, John Audley succeeds to the peerage? That is
clear?"

"Certainly! Mr. John Audley, the claimant, is also your heir-at-law."

"To title and estates--such as they are?"

"To both, my lord."

"Then follow me another step, Stubbs. Failing John Audley, who is the
next heir?"

"Mr. Peter Audley," Stubbs replied, "his only brother, would succeed,
if he were alive. But it is common ground that he is dead. I knew Mr.
Peter, and, if I may say it of an Audley, my lord, a more shiftless,
weak, improvident gentleman never lived. And obstinate as the devil!
He married into trade, and Mr. John never forgave it--never forgave
it, my lord. Never spoke of his brother or to his brother from that
time. It was before the Reform Bill," the lawyer continued with a
sigh. "There were no railways then and things were different. Dear,
dear, how the world changes! Mr. Peter must have gone abroad ten years
ago, but until he was mentioned in the suit I don't think that I had
heard his name ten times in as many years. And he an Audley!"

"He had a child?"

"Only one, a daughter."

"Would she come in after Mr. John?"

"Yes, my lord, she would--if living."

"I've been talking to her this evening."

"Ah!" The lawyer was not so simple as he seemed, and for a minute or
two he had foreseen the _dénouement_. "Ah!" he repeated, thoughtfully
rubbing his plump calf. "I see, my lord. Mr. Peter Audley's daughter?
Really! And if I may venture to ask, what is she like?"

Audley paused before he answered. Then, "If you have painted the
father aright, Stubbs, I should say that she was his opposite in all
but his obstinacy. A calm and self-reliant young woman, if I am any
judge."

"And handsome?"

"Yes, with a look of breeding. At the same time she is penniless and
dependent, teaching English in a kind of charity school, cheek by jowl
with a princess!"

"God bless my soul!" cried the lawyer, astonished at last. "A
princess!"

"Who is a good creature as women go, but as likely as not to send her
adrift to-morrow."

"Tut-tut-tut!" muttered the other.

"However, I'll tell you the story," Audley concluded. And he did so.

When he had done, "Well," Stubbs exclaimed, "for a coincidence----"

"Ah, there," the young man broke in, "I fancy, all's not said. I take
it the Princess noted the name, but was too polite to question me.
Anyway, the girl is there. She is dependent, friendless; attractive,
and well-bred. For a moment it did occur to me--she is John Audley's
heiress--that I might make all safe by----" His voice dropped. His
last words were inaudible.

"The chance is so very remote," said the lawyer, aware that he was on
delicate ground, and that the other was rather following out his own
thoughts than consulting him.

"It is. The idea crossed my mind only for a moment--of course it's
absurd for a man as poor as I am. There is hardly a poorer peer out of
Ireland--you know that. Fourteenth baron without a roof to my house
or a pane of glass in my windows! And a rent-roll when all is told
of----"

"A little short of three thousand," the lawyer muttered.

"Two thousand five hundred, by God, and not a penny more! If any man
ought to marry money, I am that man, Stubbs!"

Mr. Stubbs, staring at the fire with a hand on each knee, assented
respectfully. "I've always hoped that you would, my lord," he said,
"though I've not ventured to say it."

"Yes! Well--putting that aside," the other resumed, "what is to be
done about her? I've been thinking it over, and I fancy that I've hit
on the right line. John Audley's given me trouble enough. I'll give
him some. I'll make him provide for her, d--n him, or I don't know my
man!"

"I'd like to know, my lord," Stubbs ventured thoughtfully, "why he
didn't answer her letters. He hated her father, but it is not like Mr.
John to let the young lady drift. He's crazy about the family, and she
is his next heir. He's a lonely man, too, and there is room at the
Gatehouse."

Audley paused, half-way across the room. "I wish we had never leased
the Gatehouse to him!"

"It's not everybody's house, my lord. It's lonely and----"

"It's too near Beaudelays!"

"If your lordship were living at the Great House, quite so," the
lawyer agreed. "But, as it is, the rent is useful, and the lease was
made before our time, so that we have no choice."

"I shall always believe that he had a reason for going there!"

"He had an idea that it strengthened his claim," the lawyer said
indulgently. "Nothing beyond that, my lord."

"Well, I've made up my mind to increase his family by a niece!" the
other replied. "He shall have the girl whether he likes it or not.
Take a pen, man, and sit down. He's spoiled my breakfast many a time
with his confounded Writs of Error, or whatever you call them, and for
once I'll be even with him. Say--yes, Stubbs, say this:

"'I am directed by Lord Audley to inform you that a young lady,
believed to be a daughter of the late Mr. Peter Audley, and recently
living in poverty in an obscure'--yes, Stubbs, say obscure--'part of
Paris, has been rescued by the benevolence of a Polish lady. For the
present she is in the lady's house in a menial capacity, and is
dependent on her charity. Lord Audley is informed that the young lady
made application to you without result, but this report his lordship
discredits. Still, he feels himself concerned; and if those to whom
she naturally looks decline to aid her, it is his lordship's intention
to make such provision as may enable her to live respectably. I am to
inform you that Miss Audley's address is the Hôtel Lambert, He St.
Louis, Paris. Letters should be addressed "Care of the Housekeeper."'"

"He won't like the last touch!" the young man continued, with a quiet
chuckle. "If that does not touch him on the raw, I'll yield up the
title to-morrow. And now, Stubbs, good-night."

But Stubbs did not take the hint. "I want to say one word, my lord,
about the borough--about Riddsley," he said. "We put in Mr. Mottisfont
at the last election, your lordship's interest just tipping the scale.
We think, therefore, that a word from you may set right what is going
wrong."

"What is it?"

"There's a strong feeling," the lawyer answered, his face serious,
"that the party is not being led aright. And that Mr. Mottisfont, who
is old----"

"Is willing to go with the party, eh, Stubbs?"

"No, my lord, with the party leaders. Which is a different thing.
Sir Robert Peel--the land put him in, but, d--n me, my lord"--the
lawyer's manner lost much of its deference and he spoke bluntly and
strongly--"it looks as if he were going to put the land out! An
income-tax in peace time, we've taken that. And less protection for
the farmer, very good--if it must be. But all this taking off of
duties, this letting in of Canadian corn--I tell you, my lord, there's
an ugly feeling abroad! There are a good many in Riddsley say that he
is going to repeal the Corn Laws altogether; that he's sold us to the
League, and won't be long before he delivers us!"

The big man sitting back in his chair smiled. "It seems to me," he
said, "that you are travelling rather fast and rather far, Stubbs!"

"That's just what we fear Sir Robert is doing!" the lawyer retorted
smartly, the other's rank forgotten. "And you may take it from me the
borough won't stand it, my lord, and the sooner Mr. Mottisfont has a
hint the better. If he follows Peel too far, the bottom will fall out
of his seat. There's no Corn Law leaguer will ever sit for Riddsley!"

"With your help, anyway, Stubbs," my lord said with a smile. The
lawyer's excitement amused him.

"No, my lord! Never with my help! I believe that on the landed
interest rests the stability of the country! It was the landed
interest that supported Pitt and beat Bony, and brought us through
the long war. It was the landed interest that kept us from revolution
in the dark days after the war. And now because the men that turn
cotton and iron and clay into money by the help of the devil's
breath--because they want to pay lower wages----"

"The ark of the covenant is to be overthrown, eh?" the young man
laughed. "Why, to listen to you, Stubbs, one would think that you were
the largest landowner in the county!"

"No, my lord," the lawyer answered. "But it's the landowners have made
me what I am. And it's the landowners and the farmers that Riddsley
lives by and is going to stand by! And the sooner Mr. Mottisfont knows
that the better. He was elected as a Tory, and a Tory he must stop,
whether Sir Robert turns his coat or not!"

"You want me to speak to Mottisfont?"

"We do, my lord. Just a word. I was at the Ordinary last fair day, and
there was nothing else talked of. Free Canadian corn was too like free
French corn and free Belgian corn for Stafford wits to see much
difference. And Peel is too like repeal, my lord. We are beginning to
see that."

Audley shrugged his shoulders. "The party is satisfied," he said. "And
Mottisfont? I can't drive the man."

"No, but a word from you----"

"Well, I'll think about it. But I fancy you're overrunning the scent."

"Then the line is not straight!" the lawyer retorted shrewdly.
"However, if I have been too warm, I beg pardon, my lord."

"I'll bear it in mind," Audley answered. "Very good. And now,
good-night, Stubbs. Don't forget to send the letter to John Audley as
soon as you reach London."

Stubbs replied that he would, and took his leave. He had said his say
on the borough question, lord or no lord; which to a Briton--and he
was a typical Briton--was a satisfaction.

But half an hour later, when he had drawn his nightcap down to his
ears and stood, the extinguisher in his hand, he paused. "He's a sober
hand for a young man," he thought, "a very sober hand. I warrant he
will never run his ship on the rocks for lack of a good look-out!"




                              CHAPTER IV

                            HOMEWARD BOUND


In the corner of the light diligence, seating six inside, which had
brought her from Montreuil, Mary Audley leant forward, looking out
through the dingy panes for the windmills of Calais. Joséphine slept
in the corner facing her, as she had slept for two hours past. Their
companions, a French shopkeeper and her child, and an English bagman,
sighed and fidgeted, as travellers had cause to sigh and fidget in
days when he was lucky who covered the distance from Paris to Calais
in twenty-five hours. The coach rumbled on. The sun had set, a small
rain was falling. The fading light tinged the plain of the Pas de
Calais with a melancholy which little by little dyed the girl's
thoughts.

She was on her way to her own country, to those on whom she might be
dependent without shame. And common sense, of which she had a large
share, told her that she had cause, great cause to be thankful. But
the flush of relief, to which the opening prospect had given rise, was
ebbing. The life before her was new, those amongst whom she must lead
that life were strange; nor did the cold phrases of her uncle's
invitation, which ignored both her father and the letters that she had
written, promise an over-warm welcome.

Still, "Courage!" Mary murmured to herself, "Courage!" And she
recalled a saying which she had learned from the maid, "At the worst,
ten fingers!" Then, seeing that at last they were entering the streets
of the town and that the weary journey was over--she had left Paris
the day before--she touched Joséphine. "We are there," she said.

The maid awoke with her eyes on the bagman, who was stout. "Ah!" she
muttered. "In England they are like that! No wonder that they travel
seeing that their bones are so padded! But, for me I am one ache."

They jolted over the uneven pavement, crossed a bridge, lumbered
through streets scarcely wider than the swaying diligence, at last
with a great cracking of whips they swerved to the left and drew up
amid the babel of the quay. In a twinkling they were part of it.
Porters dragged down, fought for, snatched up their baggage.
English-speaking touts shook dirty cards in their faces. Tide-waiters
bawled questions in their ears. The postilion, the conductor, all the
world stretched greedy palms under their noses. Other travellers ran
into them, and they ran into other travellers. All this, in the dusk,
in the rain, while the bell on the deck overhead clanged above the
roar of the escaping steam, and a man shouted without ceasing, "Tower
steamer! Tower steamer! Any more for England?"

Joséphine, after one bitter exchange of words with a lad who had
seized her handbag, thrust her fingers into her ears and resigned
herself. Even Mary for a moment was aghast. She was dragged this way
and that, she lost one article and recovered it, lost another and
recovered that, she lost her ticket and rescued it from a man's hand.
At last, her baggage on board, she found herself breathless at the
foot of the ladder, with three passengers imploring her to ascend, and
six touts clinging to her skirts and crying for drink-money. She had
barely time to make her little gift to the kind-hearted maid--who was
returning to Paris by the night coach--and no time to thank her,
before they were parted. Mary was pushed up the ladder. In a moment
she was looking down from the deck on the wet, squalid quay, the pale
up-turned faces, the bustling crowd.

She picked out the one face which she knew, and which it pained her to
lose. By gestures and smiles, with a tear in the eye, she tried to
make amends to Joséphine for the hasty parting, the half-spoken words.
The maid on her side was in tears, and after the French fashion was
proud of them. So the last minute came. The paddles were already
turning, the ship was going slowly astern, when a man pushed his way
through the crowd. He clutched the ladder as it was unhooked, and at
some risk and much loss of dignity he was bundled on board. There was
a lamp amidships, and, as he regained his balance, Mary, smiling in
spite of herself, saw that he was an Englishman, a man about thirty,
and plainly dressed. Then in her anxiety to see the last of Joséphine
she crossed the deck as the ship went about, and she lost sight of
him.

She continued to look back and to wave her handkerchief, until
nothing remained but a light or two in a bank of shadow. That was the
last she was to see of the land which had been her home for ten years;
and chilled and lonely she turned about and did what, had she been
an older traveller, she would have done before. She sought the
after-cabin. Alas, a glance from the foot of the companion was enough!
Every place was taken, every couch occupied, and the air, already
close, repelled her. She climbed to the deck again, and was seeking
some corner where she could sit, sheltered from the wind and rain,
when the captain saw her and fell foul of her.

"Now, young lady," he said, "no woman's allowed on deck at night!"

"Oh, but," she protested, "there's no room downstairs!"

"Won't do," he answered roughly. "Lost a woman overboard once, and as
much trouble about her as about all the men, drunk or sober, I've ever
carried. All women below, all women below, is the order! Besides,"
more amicably, as he saw by a ray of lantern-light that she was young
and comely, "it's wet, my dear, and going to be d--d wet, and as dark
as Wapping!"

"But I've a cloak," she petitioned, "if I sit quite still, and----"

A tall form loomed up at the captain's elbow. "This is the lady I am
looking for," the new-comer said. "It will be all right, Captain
Jones."

The captain turned sharply. "Oh, my lord," he said, "I didn't know;
but with petticoats and a dark night, blest if you know where you are!
I'm sure I beg the young lady's pardon. Quite right, my lord, quite
right!" With a rough salute he went forward and the darkness swallowed
him.

"Lord Audley?" Mary said. She spoke quietly, but to do so she had to
steady her voice.

"Yes," he replied. "I knew that you were crossing to-night, and as I
had to go over this week I chose this evening. I've reserved a cabin
for you."

"Oh, but," she remonstrated, "I don't think you should have done that!
I don't know that I can----"

"Afford it?" he said coolly. "Then--as it is a matter of some
shillings--your kinsman will presume to pay for it."

It was a small thing, and she let it pass. "But who told you," she
asked, "that I was crossing to-night?"

"The Princess. You don't feel, I suppose, that as you are crossing, it
was my duty to stay in France?"

"Oh no!" she protested.

"But you are not sure whether you are more pleased or more vexed?
Well, let me show you where your cabin is--it is the size of a
milliner's box, but by morning you will be glad of it, and that may
turn the scale. Moreover," as he led the way across the deck, "the
steward's boy, when he is not serving gin below, will serve tea above,
and at sea tea is not to be scorned. That's your number--7. And there
is the boy. Boy!" he called in a voice that ensured obedience, "Tea
and bread and butter for this lady in number 7 in an hour. See it is
there, my lad!"

She smiled. "I think the tea and bread and butter may turn the scale,"
she said.

"Right," he replied. "Then, as it is only eight o'clock, why should we
not sit in the shelter of this tarpaulin? I see that there are two
seats. They might have been put for us."

"Is it possible that they were?" she asked shrewdly. "Well, why not?"

She had no reason to give--and the temptation was great. Five minutes
before she had been the most lonely creature in the world. The parting
from Joséphine, the discomfort of the boat, the dark sea and the
darker horizon, the captain's rough words, had brought the tears to
her eyes. And then, in a moment, to be thought of, provided for,
kindly entreated, to be lapped in attentions as in a cloak--in very
fact, in another second a warm cloak was about her--who could expect
her to refuse this? Moreover, he was her kinsman; probably she owed it
to him that she was here.

At any rate she thought that it would be prudish to demur, and she
took one of the seats in the lee of the screen. Audley tucked the
cloak about her, and took the other. The light of a lantern fell on
their faces and the few passengers who still tramped the windy deck
could see the pair, and doubtless envied him their shelter. "Are you
comfortable?" he inquired--but before she could answer he whistled
softly.

"What is it?" Mary asked.

"Not much." He laughed to himself.

Then she saw coming along the deck towards them a man who had not
found his sea-legs. As he approached he took little runs, and now
brought up against the rail, now clutched at a stay. Mary knew the man
again. "He nearly missed the boat," she whispered.

"Did he?" her companion answered in the same tone. "Well, if he had
quite missed it, I'd have forgiven him. He is going to be ill, I'll
wager!"

When the man was close to them he reeled, and to save himself he
grasped the end of their screen. His eyes met theirs. He was past much
show of emotion, but his voice rose as he exclaimed, "Audley. Is that
you?"

"It is. We are in for a rough night, I'm afraid."

"And--pardon me," the stranger hesitated, peering at them, "is that
Miss Audley with you?"

"Yes," Mary said, much surprised.

"Oh!"

"This is Mr. Basset," Audley explained. Mary stared at the stranger.
The name conveyed nothing to her.

"I came to meet you," he said, speaking with difficulty, and now and
again casting a wild eye abroad as the deck heaved under him. "But I
expected to find you at the hotel, and I waited there until I nearly
missed the boat. Even then I felt that I ought to learn if you were on
board, and I came up to see."

"I am very much obliged to you," Mary answered politely, "but I am
quite comfortable, thank you. It is close below, and Lord Audley found
this seat for me. And I have a cabin."

"Oh yes!" he answered. "I think I will go down then if you--if you are
sure you want nothing."

"Nothing, thank you," Mary answered with decision.

"I think I--I'll go, then. Good-night!"

With that he went, making desperate tacks in the direction of the
companion. Unfortunately what he gained in speed he lost in dignity,
and before he reached the hatch Lord Audley gave way to laughter.

"Oh, don't!" Mary cried. "He will hear you. And it was kind of him to
look for me when he was not well."

But Audley only laughed the more. "You don't catch the full flavor of
it," he said. "He's come three hundred miles to meet you, and he's too
ill to do anything now he's here!"

"Three hundred miles to meet me!" she cried in astonishment.

"Every yard of it! Don't you know who he is? He's Peter Basset, your
uncle's nephew by marriage, who lives with him. He's come, or rather
your uncle has sent him, all the way from Stafford to meet you--and
he's gone to lie down! He's gone to lie down! There's a squire of
dames for you! Upon my honor, I never knew anything richer!"

And my lord's laughter broke out anew.




                              CHAPTER V

                          THE LONDON PACKET


Mary laughed with him, but she was not comfortable. What she had seen
of the stranger, a man plain in feature and ordinary in figure, one
whom the eye would not have remarked in a crowd, did not especially
commend him. And certainly he had not shown himself equal to a
difficult situation. But the effort he had made to come to her help
appealed to her generosity, and she was not sure how far she formed a
part of the comedy. So her laughter was from the lips only, and brief.
Then, "My uncle's nephew?" she asked thoughtfully.

"His wife's nephew. Your uncle married a Basset."

"But why did he send him to meet me?"

"For a simple reason--I should say that he had no one else to send.
Your uncle is not a man of many friends."

"I understood that some one would meet the boat in London," she said.
"But I expected a woman."

"I fancy the woman would be to seek," he replied. "And Basset is a
kind of tame cat at the Gatehouse. He lives there a part of the year,
though he has an old place of his own up the country. He's a
Staffordshire man born and bred, and I dare say a good fellow in his
way, but a dull dog! a dull dog! Are you sure that the wind does not
catch you?"

She said that she was very comfortable, and they were silent awhile,
listening to the monotonous slapping of a rope against the mast and
the wash of the waves as they surged past the beam. A single light at
the end of the breakwater shone in the darkness behind them. She
marked the light grow smaller and more distant, and her thoughts went
back to the convent school, to her father, to the third-floor where
for a time they had been together, to his care for her--feeble and
inefficient, to his illness. And a lump rose in her throat, her hands
gripped one another as she strove to hide her feelings. In her heart
she whispered a farewell. She was turning her back on her father's
grave. The last tendril which bound her to the old life was breaking.

The light vanished, and gradually the girl's reflections sought a new
channel. They turned from the past to the present, and dwelt on the
man beside her, who had not only thought of her comfort, who had not
only saved her from some hours of loneliness, but had probably wrought
this change in her life. This was the third time only that she had
seen him. Once, some days after that memorable evening, he had called
at the Hôtel Lambert, and her employer had sent for her. He had
greeted her courteously in the Princess's presence, had asked her
kindly if she had heard from England, and had led her to believe that
she would hear. And she remembered with a blush that the Princess had
looked from one to the other with a smile, and afterwards had had
another manner for her.

Meanwhile the man wondered what she was thinking, and waited for her
to give him the clue. But she was so long silent that his patience
wore thin. It was not for this, it was not to sit silent beside her,
that he had taken a night journey and secured these cosey seats.

"Well?" he said at last.

She turned to him, her eyes wet with tears. "It seems so strange," she
murmured, "to be leaving all and going into a world in which I know no
one."

"Except the head of your family."

"Except you! I suppose that I owe it to you that I am here?"

"I should be happy if I thought so," he replied, with careful
reticence. "But we set a stone rolling, we do not know where it falls.
You will soon learn--Basset will tell you, if I don't--that your uncle
and I are not on good terms. Therefore it is unlikely that he was
moved by what I said."

"But you said something?"

"If I did," he answered, smiling, "it was against the grain--who likes
to put his finger between the door and the jamb? And let me caution
you. Your uncle will not suffer meddling on my part, still less a
reminder of it. Therefore, as you are going to owe all to him, you
will do well to be silent about me."

She was sure that she owed all to him, and she might have said so, but
at that moment the boat changed its course and the full force of the
wind struck them. The salt spray whipped and stung their faces. Her
cloak flew out like a balloon, her scarf pennon-wise, the tarpaulin
flapped like some huge bird. He had to spring to the screen, to adjust
it to the new course, to secure and tuck in her cloak--and all in
haste, with exclamations and laughter, while Mary, sharing the joy of
the struggle, and braced by the sting of the salt wind, felt her heart
rise. How kind he was, and how strong. How he towered above ordinary
men. How safe she felt in his care.

When they were settled anew, she asked him to tell her something about
the Gatehouse.

"It's a lonely place," he said. "It is quite out of the world. I don't
know, indeed, how you will exist after the life you have led."

"The life I have led!" she protested. "But that is absurd! Though you
saw me in the Princess's salon, you know that my life had nothing in
common with hers. I was downstairs no more than three or four times,
and then merely to interpret. My life was spent between whitewashed
walls, on bare floors. I slept in a room with twenty children, ate
with forty--onion soup and thick tartines. The evening I saw you I
wore shoes which the maid lent me. And with all that I was thankful,
most thankful, to have such a refuge. The great people who met at the
Princess's----"

"And who thought that they were making history!" he laughed. "Did you
know that? Did you know that the Princess was looking to them to save
the last morsel of Poland?"

"No," she said. "I did not know. I am very ignorant. But if I were a
man, I should love to do things like that."

"I believe you would!" he replied. "Well, there are crusades in
England. Only I fear that you will not be in the way of them."

"And I am not a princess! But tell me, please, what are they?"

"You will not be long before you come upon one," he replied, a hint of
derision in his tone. "You will see a placard in the streets, '_Shall
the people's bread be taxed?_' Not quite so romantic as the
independence of Poland? But I can tell you that heads are quite as
likely to be broken over it."

"Surely," she said, "there can be only one answer to that."

"Just so," he replied dryly. "But what is the answer? The land
claims high prices that it may thrive; the towns claim cheap bread
that they may live. Each says that the country depends upon it.
'England self-supporting!' says one. 'England the workshop of the
world!' says the other."

"I begin to see."

"'The land is the strength of the country,' argues the squire. 'Down
with monopoly,' cries the cotton lord. Then each arms himself with a
sword lately forged and called 'Philanthropy,' and with that he
searches for chinks in the other's armor. 'See how factories work the
babes, drive the women underground, ruin the race,' shout the squires.
'Vote for the land and starvation wages,' shout the mill-owners."

"But does no one try to find the answer?" she asked timidly. "Try to
find out what is best for the people?"

"Ah!" he rejoined, "if by the people you mean the lower classes, they
cry, 'Give us not bread, but votes!' And the squires say that that is
what the traders who have just got votes don't mean to give them; and
so, to divert their attention, dangle cheap bread before their noses!"

Mary sighed. "I am afraid that I must give it up," she said. "I am so
ignorant."

"Well," he replied thoughtfully. "Many are puzzled which side to take,
and are waiting to see how the cat jumps. In the meantime every fence
is placarded with 'Speed the Plough!' on one side, and 'The Big Loaf!'
on the other. The first man you meet thinks the landlord a devourer of
widows' houses; to the next the mill-owner is an ogre grinding men's
bones to make his bread. Even at the Gatehouse I doubt if you will
escape the excitement, though there is not a field of wheat within a
mile of it!"

"To me it is like a new world," she said.

"Then, when you are in the new world," he replied, smiling as he rose,
"do not forget Columbus! But here is the lad to tell you that your tea
is ready."

He repented when Mary had left him that he had not made better use of
his time. It had been his purpose to make such an impression on the
girl as might be of use in the future, and he wondered why he had not
devoted himself more singly to this; why he had allowed minutes which
might have been given to intimate subjects to be wasted in a dry
discussion. But there was a quality in Mary that did not lightly
invite to gallantry--a gravity and a balance that, had he looked
closely into the matter, might have explained his laches.

And in fact he had builded better than he knew, for while he
reproached himself, Mary, safe within the tiny bathing machine which
the packet company called a cabin, was giving much thought to him. The
dip-candle, set within a horn lantern, threw its light on the one
comfortable object, the tea-tray, seated beside which she reviewed
what had happened, and found it all interesting; his meeting with her,
his thought for her, the glimpses he had given her of things beyond
the horizon of the convent school, even his diversion into politics.
He was not on good terms with her uncle, and it was unlikely that she
would see more of him. But she was sure that she would always remember
his appearance on the threshold of her new life, that she would always
recall with gratitude this crossing and the kindness which had lapped
her about and saved her from loneliness.

In her eyes he figured as one of the brilliant circle of the Hôtel
Lambert. For her he played a part in great movements and high
enterprises such as those which he had revealed to her. His light
treatment of them, his air of detachment, had, indeed, chilled her at
times; but these were perhaps natural in one who viewed from above and
from a distance the ills which it was his task to treat. How ignorant
he must think her! How remote from the plane on which he lived, the
standards by which he judged, the objects at which he aimed! Yet he
had stooped to explain things to her and to make them clear.

She spent an hour deep in thought, and, strange as the life of the
ship was to her, she was deaf to the creaking of the timbers, and the
surge of the waves as they swept past the beam. At intervals hoarse
orders, a rush of feet across the deck, the more regular tramp of rare
passengers, caught her attention, only to lose it as quickly. It was
late when she roused herself. She saw that the candle was burning low,
and she began to make her arrangements for the night.

Midway in them she paused, and colored, aware that she knew his tread
from the many that had passed. The footstep ceased. A hand tapped at
her door. "Yes?" she said.

"We shall be in the river by daybreak," Audley announced. "I thought
that you might like to come on deck early. You ought not to miss the
river from the Nore to the Pool."

"Thank you," she answered.

"You shouldn't miss it," he persisted. "Greenwich especially!"

"I shall be there," she replied. "It is very good of you. Good-night."

He went away. After all, he was the only man on board shod like a
gentleman; it had been odd if she had not known his step! And for
going on deck early, why should she not? Was she to miss Greenwich
because Lord Audley went to a good bootmaker?

So when Peter Basset, still pale and qualmish, came on deck in the
early morning, a little below the Pool, the first person he saw was
the girl whom he had come to escort. She was standing high above him
on the captain's bridge, her hands clasping the rail, her hair blown
about and shining golden in the sunshine. Lord Audley's stately form
towered above her. He was pointing out this and that, and they were
talking gaily; and now and again the captain spoke to them, and many
were looking at them. She did not see Basset; he was on the deck
below, standing amid the common crowd, and so he was free to look at
her as he pleased. He might be said not to have seen her before, and
what he saw now bewildered, nay, staggered him. Unwillingly, and to
please his uncle, he had come to meet a girl of whom they knew no more
than this, that, rescued from some backwater of Paris life, into which
a weak and shiftless father had plunged her, she had earned her
living, if she had earned it at all, in a dependent capacity. He had
looked to find her one of two things; either flashy and underbred,
with every fault an Englishman might consider French, or a nice
mixture of craft and servility. He had not been able to decide which
he would prefer.

Instead he saw a girl tall, slender, and slow of movement, with eyes
set under a fine width of brow and grave when they smiled, a chin
fuller than perfect beauty required, a mouth a little large, a perfect
nose. Auburn hair, thick and waving, drooped over each temple, and
framed a face as calm as it was fair. "Surely a pearl found on a
midden!" he thought. And as the thought passed through his mind, Mary
looked down. Her eyes roved for a moment over the crowded deck, where
some, like Basset, returned her gaze with interest, while others
sought their baggage or bawled for missing companions. He was not a
man, it has been said, to stand out in a crowd, and her eyes travelled
over him without seeing him. Audley spoke to her, she lifted her eyes,
she looked ashore again. But the unheeding glance which had not
deigned to know him stung Basset! He dubbed her, with all her beauty,
proud and hard. Still--to be such and to have sprung from such a life!
It was marvellous.

He knew nothing of the convent school with its hourly discipline
lasting through years. He did not guess that the obstinacy which had
been weakness in the father was strength in the child. Much less could
he divine that the improvidence of that father had become a beacon,
warning the daughter off the rocks which had been fatal to him! Mary
was no miracle, but neither was she proud or hard.

They had passed Erith, and Greenwich with its stately pile and formal
gardens glittering in the sunshine of an April morning. The ripple of
a westerly wind, meeting the flood, silvered the turbid surface. A
hundred wherries skimmed like water-flies hither and thither, long
lines of colliers fringed the wharves, tall China clippers forged
slowly up under a scrap of foresail, dumb barges deep laden with hay
or Barclay's Entire, moved mysteriously with the tide. On all sides
hoarse voices bawled orders or objurgations. Charmed with the gayety,
the movement, the color, Mary could not take her eyes from the scene.
The sunshine, the leap of life, the pulse of spring, moved in her
blood and put to flight the fears that had weighed on her at
nightfall. She told herself with elation that this was England, this
was her native land, this was her home.

Meanwhile Audley's mind took another direction. He reflected that in a
few minutes he must part from the girl, and must trust henceforth to
the impression he had made. For some hours he had scarcely given a
thought to Basset, but he recalled him now, and he searched for him in
the throng below. He found him at last, pressed against the rail
between a fat woman with a basket and a crying child. Their eyes met.
My lord glanced away, but he could not refrain from a smile as he
pictured the poor affair the other had made of his errand. And
Basset saw the smile and read its meaning, and though he was not
self--assertive, though he was, indeed, backward to a fault, anger ran
through his veins. To have travelled three hundred miles in order to
meet this girl, to have found her happy in another's company, and to
have accepted the second place--the position had vexed him even under
the qualms of illness. This morning, and since he had seen her, it
stirred in him an unwonted resentment. He d--d Audley under his
breath, disengaged himself from the basket which the fat woman was
thrusting into his ribs, lifted the child aside. He escaped below to
collect his effects.

But in a short time he recovered his temper. When the boat began to go
about in the crowded Pool and Mary reluctantly withdrew her eyes from
the White Tower, darkened by the smoke and the tragedies of twenty
generations, she found him awaiting them at the foot of the ladder. He
was still pale, and the girl's conscience smote her. For many hours
she had not given him a thought. "I hope you are better," she said
gently.

"Horrid thing, _mal de mer!_" remarked my lord, with a gleam of humor
in his eye.

"Thank you, I am quite right this morning," Basset answered.

"You go from Euston Grove, I suppose?"

"Yes. The morning train starts in a little over an hour."

No more was said, and they went ashore together. Audley, an old
traveller, and one whose height and presence gave weight to his
orders, saw to Mary's safety in the crowd, shielded her from touts and
tide-waiters, took the upper hand. He watched the aproned porters
disappearing with the baggage in the direction of the Custom House,
and a thought struck him. "I am sorry that my servant is not here," he
said. "He would see our things through without troubling us." His eyes
met Basset's.

Basset disdained to refuse. "I will do it," he said. He received the
keys and followed the baggage.

Audley looked at Mary and laughed. "I think you'll find him useful,"
he said. "Takes a hint and is not too forward."

"For shame!" she cried. "It is very good of him to go." But she could
not refrain from a smile.

"Well trained," Audley continued in a whimsical tone, "fetches and
carries, barks at the name of Peel and growls at the name of Cobden,
gives up a stick when required, could be taught to beg--by the right
person."

She laughed--she could not resist his manner. "But you are not very
kind," she said. "Please to call a--whatever we need. He shall not do
everything."

"Everything?" Lord Audley echoed. "He should do nothing," in a lower
tone, "if I had my way."

Mary blushed.




                              CHAPTER VI

                           FIELD AND FORGE


The window of the clumsy carriage was narrow, but Mary gazed through
it as if she could never see enough of the flying landscape, the
fields, the woods, the ivy-clad homes and red-roofed towns that passed
in procession before her. The emotions of those who journeyed for the
first time on a railway at a speed four times as great as that of the
swiftest High-flier that ever devoured the road are forgotten by this
generation. But they were vivid. The thing was a miracle. And though
by this time men had ceased to believe that he who passed through the
air at sixty miles an hour must of necessity cease to breathe, the
novice still felt that he could never tire of the panorama so swiftly
unrolled before him.

And it was not only wonder, it was admiration that held Mary chained
to the window. Her infancy had been spent in a drab London street, her
early youth in the heart of a Paris which was still gloomy and
mediæval. Some beautiful things she had seen on fête days, the
bend of the river at Meudon or St. Germain, and once the Forest
of Fontainebleau; on Sundays the Bois. But the smiling English
meadows, the gray towers of village churches, the parks and lawns of
manor-houses, the canals with their lines of painted barges, and here
and there a gay packet boat--she drank in the beauty of these, and
more than once her eyes grew dim. For a time Basset, seated in the
opposite corner, did not exist for her; while he, behind the _Morning
Chronicle_, made his observations and took note of her at his leisure.
The longer he looked the more he marvelled.

He asked himself with amusement what John Audley would think of her
when he, too, should see her. He anticipated the old man's surprise on
finding her so remote from their preconceived ideas of her. He
wondered what she would think of John Audley.

And while he pondered, and now scanned his paper without reading it,
and now stole another glance at her, he steeled himself against her.
She might not have been to blame, it might not have been her fault;
but, between them, the two on the boat had put him in his place and he
could not forget it. He had cut a poor figure, and he resented it. He
foresaw that in the future she would be dependent on him for society,
and he would be a fool if he then forgot the lesson he had learned.
She had a good face, but probably her up-bringing had been anything
but good. Probably it had taught her to make the most of the moment
and of the man of the moment, and he would be foolish if he let her
amuse herself with him. He had seen in what light she viewed him when
other game was afoot, and he would deserve the worst if he did not
remember this.

Presently an embankment cut off the view, and she withdrew her eyes
from the window. In her turn she took the measure of her companion. It
seemed to her that his face was too thoughtful for his years, and that
his figure was insignificant. The eye which had accustomed itself to
Lord Audley's port and air found Basset slight and almost mean. She
smiled as she recalled the skill with which my lord had set him aside
and made use of him.

Still, he was a part of the life to which she was hastening, and
curiosity stirred in her. He was in possession, he was in close
relations with her uncle, he knew many things which she was anxious to
know. Much of her comfort might depend on him. Presently she asked him
what her uncle was like.

"You will see for yourself in a few hours," he replied, his tone cold
and almost ungracious. "Did not Lord Audley describe him?"

"No. And you seem," with a faint smile, "to be equally on your guard,
Mr. Basset."

"Not at all," he retorted. "But I think it better to leave you to
judge for yourself. I have lived too near to Mr. Audley to--to
criticise him."

She colored.

"Let me give you one hint, however," he continued in the same dry
tone; "you will be wise not to mention Lord Audley to him. They are
not on good terms."

"I am sorry."

He shrugged his shoulders. "It cannot be said to be unnatural, after
what has happened."

She considered this. "What has happened?" she asked after a pause.

"Well, the claim to the peerage, if nothing else----"

"What claim?" she asked. "Whose claim? What peerage? I am quite in the
dark."

He stared. He did not believe her. "Your uncle's claim," he said
curtly. Then as she still looked a question, "You must know," he
continued, "that your uncle claimed the title which Lord Audley bears,
and the property which goes with it. And that the decision was only
given against him three months ago."

"I know nothing of it," she said. "I never heard of the claim."

"Really?" he replied. He hardly deigned to veil his incredulity. "Yet
if your uncle had succeeded you were the next heir."

"I?"

"Yes, you."

Then her face shook his unbelief. She turned slowly and painfully red.
"Is it possible?" she said. "You are not playing with me?"

"Certainly I am not. Do you mean that Lord Audley never told you that?
Never told you that you were interested?"

"Never! He only told me that he was not on good terms with my uncle,
and that for that reason he would leave me to learn the rest at the
Gatehouse."

"Well, that was right," Basset answered. "It is as well, since you
have to live with Mr. Audley, that you should not be prejudiced
against him."

"No doubt," she said dryly. "But I do not understand why he did not
answer my letters."

"Did you write to him?"

"Twice." She was going to explain the circumstances, but she
refrained. Why appeal to the sympathies of one who seemed so cold, so
distant, so indifferent?

"He cannot have had the letters," Basset decided after a pause.

"Then how did he come to write to me at last?"

"Lord Audley sent your address to him."

"Ah!" she said. "I supposed so." With an air of finality she turned to
the window, and for some time she was silent. Her mind had much upon
which to work.

She was silent for so long that before more was said they were running
through the outskirts of Birmingham, and Mary awoke with a shock to
another and sadder side of England. In place of parks and homesteads
she saw the England of the workers--workers at that time exploited to
the utmost in pursuance of a theory of economy that heeded only the
wealth of nations, and placed on that wealth the narrowest meaning.
They passed across squalid streets, built in haste to meet the needs
of new factories, under tall chimneys the smoke of which darkened the
sky without hindrance, by vile courts, airless and almost sunless.
They looked down on sallow children whose only playground was the
street and whose only school-bell was the whistle that summoned them
at dawn to premature toil. Haggard women sat on doorsteps with puling
babes in their arms. Lines of men, whose pallor peered through the
grime, propped the walls, or gazed with apathy at the train. For a few
minutes Mary forgot not only her own hopes and fears, but the
aloofness and even the presence of her companion. When they came to a
standstill in the station, where they had to change on to the Grand
Junction Railway, Basset had to speak twice before she understood that
he wished her to leave the carriage.

"What a dreadful place!" she exclaimed.

"Well, it is not beautiful," Basset admitted. "One does not look for
beauty in Birmingham and the Black Country."

He got her some tea, and marshalled her carefully to the upper line.
But his answer had jarred upon her, and when they were again seated,
Mary kept her thoughts to herself. Beyond Birmingham their route
skirted towns rather than passed through them, but she saw enough to
deepen the impression which the lanes and alleys of that place had
made upon her. The sun had set and the cold evening light revealed in
all their meanness the rows of naked cottages, the heaps of slag and
cinders, the starveling horses that stood with hanging heads on the
dreary lands. As darkness fell, fires shone out here and there, and
threw into Dantesque relief the dark forms of half-naked men toiling
with fury to feed the flames. The change which an hour had made in all
she saw seemed appalling to the girl; it filled her with awe and
sadness. Here, so near the paradise of the country and the plough, was
the Inferno of the town, the forge, the pit! Here, in place of the
thatched cottage and the ruddy faces, were squalor and sunken cheeks
and misery and dearth.

She thought of the question which Lord Audley had raised twenty-four
hours before, and which he had told her was racking the minds of
men--should food be taxed? And she fancied that there was, there could
be, but one answer. These toiling masses, these slaves of the hammer
and the pick, must be fed, and, surely, so fed that a margin, however
small, however meagre, might be saved out of which to better their
sordid lot.

"We call this the Black Country," Basset explained, feeling the
silence irksome. After all, she was in his charge, in a way she was
his guest. He ought to amuse her.

"It is well named," she answered. "Is there anything in England worse
than this?"

"Well, round Hales Owen and Dudley," he rejoined, "it may be worse.
And at Cradley Heath it may be rougher. More women and children are
employed in the pits; and where women make chains--well, it's pretty
bad."

She had spoken dryly to hide her feelings. He replied in a tone as
matter-of-fact, through lack of feeling. For this he was not so much
to blame as she fancied, for that which horrified her was to him an
everyday matter, one of the facts of life with which he had been
familiar from boyhood. But she did not understand this. She judged him
and condemned him. She did not speak again.

By and by, "We shall be at Penkridge in twenty minutes," he said.
"After that a nine-miles drive will take us to the Gatehouse, and your
journey will be over. But I fear that you will find the life quiet
after Paris."

"I was very quiet in Paris."

"But you were in a large house."

"I was at the Princess Czartoriski's."

"Of course. I suppose it was there that you met Lord Audley?"

"Yes."

"Well, after that kind of life, I am afraid that the Gatehouse will
have few charms for you. It is very remote, very lonely."

She cut him short with impatience, the color rising to her face. "I
thought you understood," she said, "that I was in the Princess's house
as a governess? It was my business to take care of a number of
children, to eat with them, to sleep with them, to see that they
washed their hands and kept their hair clean. That was my position,
Mr. Basset. I do not wish it to be misunderstood."

"But if that were so," he stammered, "how did you----"

"Meet Lord Audley," she replied. "Very simply. Once or twice the
Princess ordered me to descend to the salon to interpret. On one of
these occasions Lord Audley saw me and learned--who I was."

"Indeed," he said. "I see." Perhaps he had had it in his mind to test
her and the truth of Audley's letter, which nothing in her or in my
lord's conduct seemed to confirm. He did not know if this had been in
his mind, but in any case the result silenced him. She was either very
honest or very clever. Many girls, he knew, would have slurred over
the facts, and not a few would have boasted of the Princess's
friendship and the Princess's society, and the Princess's hôtel, and
brought up her name a dozen times a day.

She is very clever, he thought, or she is--good. But for the moment he
steeled himself against the latter opinion.

No other travellers alighted at Penkridge, and he went away to claim
the baggage, while she waited, cold and depressed, on the little
platform which, lit by a single oil lamp, looked down on a dim
churchyard. Dusk was passing into night, and the wind, sweeping across
the flat, whipped her skirts and chilled her blood. Her courage sank.
A light or two betrayed the nearness of the town, but in every other
direction dull lines of willows or pale stretches of water ran into
the night.

Five minutes before she had resented Basset's company, now she was
glad to see him return. He led the way to the road in silence. "The
carriage is late," he muttered, but even as he spoke the quick tramp
of a pair of horses pushed to speed broke on them, lights appeared, a
moment later a fly pulled up beside them and turned. "You are late,"
Basset said.

"There!" the man replied. "Minutes might be guineas since trains came
in, dang 'em! Give me the days when five minutes made neither man nor
mouse, and gentry kept their own time."

"Well, let us get off now."

"I ask no better, Squire. Please yourself and you'll please me."

When they were shut in, Basset laughed. "Stafford manners!" he said.
"You'll become used to them!"

"Is this my uncle's carriage?" she asked.

"No," he replied, smiling in the darkness. "He does not keep one."

She said no more. Though she could not see him, her shoulder touched
his, and his nearness and the darkness in which they sat troubled her,
though she was not timid. They rode thus for a minute or two, then
trundled through a narrow street, dimly lit by shop windows; again
they were in the dark and the country. Presently the pace dropped to a
walk as they began to ascend.

She fancied, peering out on her side, that they were winding up
through woods. Branches swept the sides of the carriage. They jolted
into ruts and jolted out of them. By and by they were clear of the
trees and the road seemed to be better. The moon, newly risen, showed
her a dreary upland, bare and endless, here dotted with the dark
stumps of trees, there of a deeper black as if fire had swept over it
and scarred it. They met no one, saw no sign of habitation. To the
girl, accustomed all her life to streets and towns, the place seemed
infinitely desolate--a place of solitude and witches and terror and
midnight murder.

"What is this?" she asked, shivering.

"This is the Great Chase," he said. "Riddsley, on the farther side, is
our nearest town, but since the railway was opened we use Penkridge
Station."

His practical tone steadied her, but she was tired, and the loneliness
which she had felt while she waited on the bleak platform weighed
heavily on her. To what was she going? How would her uncle receive
her? This dreary landscape, the gaunt signpost that looked like a
gibbet and might have been one, the skeleton trees that raised bare
arms to heaven, the scream of a dying rabbit, all added to the
depression of the moment. She was glad when at last the carriage
stopped at a gate. Basset alighted and opened the gate. He stepped in
again, they went on. There were now shadowy trees about them, sparsely
set. They jolted unevenly over turf.

"Are we there?" she asked, a tremor in her voice.

"Very nearly," he said. "Another mile and we shall be there. This is
Beaudelays Park."

She called pride to her aid, and he did not guess--for all day he had
marked her self-possession--that she was trembling. Vainly she told
herself that she was foolish, that nothing could happen to her,
nothing that mattered. What, after all, was a cold reception, what was
her uncle's frown beside the poverty and the hazards from which she
had escaped? Vainly she reassured herself; she could not still the
rapid beating of her heart.

He might have said a word to cheer her. But he did not know that she
was suffering, and he said no word. She came near to hating him for
his stolidity and his silence. He was inhuman! A block!

She peered through the misty glass, striving to see what was before
them. But she could make out no more than the dark limbs of trees, and
now and then a trunk, which shone as the light of the lamp slipped
over it, and as quickly vanished. Suddenly they shot from turf to hard
road, passed through an open gateway, for an instant the lamp on her
side showed a grotesque pillar--they wheeled, they stopped. Within a
few feet of her a door stood open, and in the doorway a girl held a
lantern aloft in one hand, and with the other screened her eyes from
the light.




                             CHAPTER VII

                           MR. JOHN AUDLEY


An hour later Basset was seated on one side of a wide hearth,
on the other John Audley faced him. The library in which they sat was
the room which Basset loved best in the world. It was a room of
silence and large spaces, and except where four windows, tall and
narrow, broke one wall, it was lined high with the companions of
silence--books. The ceiling was of black oak, adorned at the crossings
of the joists and beams with emblems, butterflies, and Stafford knots
and the like, once bright with color, and still soberly rich. A
five-sided bay enlarged each of the two inner corners of the
room and broke the outlines. One of these bays shrined a window,
four-mullioned, the other a spiral staircase. An air of comfort and
stateliness pervaded the whole; here the great scutcheon over the
mantel, there the smaller coats on the chair-backs blended their or
and gules with the hues of old rugs and the dun bindings of old
folios. There were books on the four or five tables, and books on the
Cromwell chairs; and charts and deeds, antique weapons and silver
pieces, all the tools and toys of the antiquary, lay broadcast.
Against the door hung a blazoned pedigree of the Audleys of
Beaudelays. It was six feet long and dull with age.

But Basset, as he faced his companion, was not thinking of the room,
or of the pursuits with which it was connected in his mind, and which,
more than affection and habit, bound him to John Audley. He moved
restlessly in his chair, then stretched his legs to meet the glow of
the wood fire. "All the same," he said, "I think you would have done
well to see her to-night, sir."

"Pooh! pooh!" John Audley answered with lazy good humor. "Why? It
doesn't matter what I think of her or she thinks of me. It's what
Peter thinks of Mary and Mary thinks of Peter that matters. That's
what matters!" He chuckled as he marked the other's annoyance. "She is
a beauty, is she?"

"I didn't say so."

"But you think it. You don't deceive me at this time of day. And
stand-off, is she? That's for the marines and innocent young fellows
like you who think women angels. I'll be bound that she's her mother's
daughter, and knows her value and will see that she fetches it!
Trading blood will out!"

To the eye that looked and glanced away John Audley, lolling in his
chair, in a quilted dressing-gown with silk facings, was a plump and
pleasant figure. His face was fresh-colored, and would have been
comely if the cheeks had not been a little pendulous. His hair was
fine and white and he wore it long, and his hands were shapely and
well cared for. As he said his last word he poured a little brandy
into a glass and filled it up with water. "Here's to the wooing that's
not long adoing!" he said, his eyes twinkling. He seemed to take a
pleasure in annoying the other.

He was so far successful that Basset swore softly. "It's silly to talk
like that," he said, "when I have hardly known the girl twenty-four
hours and have scarcely said ten times as many words to her."

"But you're going to say a good many more words to her!" Audley
retorted, grinning. "Sweet, pretty words, my boy! But there, there,"
he continued, veering between an elfish desire to tease and a desire
equally strong to bring the other to his way of thinking. "I'm only
joking. I know you'll never let that devil have his way! You'll never
leave the course open for _him!_ I know that. But there's no hurry!
There's no hurry. Though, lord, how I sweated when I read his letter!
I had never a wink of sleep the night after."

"I don't suppose that he's given a thought to her in that way," Basset
answered. "Why should he?"

John Audley leant forward, and his face underwent a remarkable change.
It became a pale, heavy mask, out of which his eyes gleamed, small and
malevolent. "Don't talk like a fool!" he said harshly. "Of course he
means it. And if she's fool enough all my plans, all my pains, all my
rights--and once you come to your senses and help me I shall have my
rights--all, all, all will go for nothing. For nothing!" He sank back
in his chair. "There! now you've excited me. You've excited me, and
you know that I can't bear excitement!" His hand groped feebly for his
glass, and he raised it to his lips. He gasped once or twice. The
color came back to his face.

"I am sorry," Basset said.

"Ay, ay. But be a good lad. Be a good lad. Make up your mind to help
me at the Great House."

Basset shook his head.

"To help me, and twenty-four hours--only twenty-four hours, man--may
make all the difference! All the difference in the world to me."

"I have told you my views about it," Basset said doggedly. He shifted
uneasily in his chair. "I cannot do it, sir, and I won't."

John Audley groaned. "Well, well!" he answered. "I'll say no more now.
I'll say no more now. When you and she have made it up"--in vain
Basset shook his head--"you'll see the question in another light. Ay,
believe me, you will. It'll be your business then, and your interest,
and nothing venture, nothing win! You'll see it differently. You'll
help the old man to his rights then."

Basset shrugged his shoulders, but thought it useless to protest. The
other sighed once or twice and was silent also. At length, "You never
told me that you had heard from her," Basset said.

"That I'd----" John Audley broke off. "What is it, Toft?" he asked
over his shoulder.

A man-servant, tall, thin, lantern-jawed, had entered unseen. "I came
to see if you wanted anything more, sir?" he said.

"Nothing, nothing, Toft. Good-night!" He spoke impatiently, and he
watched the man out before he went on. Then, "Perhaps I heard from
her, perhaps I didn't," he said. "It's some time ago. What of it?"

"She was in great distress when she wrote."

John Audley raised his eyebrows. "What of it!" he repeated.
"She was that woman's daughter. When Peter married a tradesman's
daughter--married a----" He did not continue. His thoughts trickled
away into silence. The matter was not worthy of his attention.

But by and by he roused himself. "You've ridiculous scruples," he
said. "Absurd scruples. But," briskly, "there's that much of good in
this girl that I think she'll put an end to them. You must brighten
up, my lad, and spark it a little! You're too grave."

"Damn!" said Basset. "For God's sake, don't begin it all again. I've
told you that I've not the least intention----"

"She'll see to that if she's what I think her," John Audley retorted
cheerfully. "If she's her mother's daughter! But very well, very well!
We'll change the subject. I've been working at the Feathers--the
Prince's Feathers."

"Have you gone any farther?" Basset asked, forcing an interest which
would have been ready enough at another time.

"I might have, but I had a visitor."

Visitors were rare at the Gatehouse, and Basset wondered. "Who was
it?" he asked.

"Bagenal the maltster from Riddsley. He came about some political
rubbish. Some trouble they are having with Mottisfont. D--n
Mottisfont! What do I care about him? They think he isn't running
straight--that he's going in for corn-law repeal. And Bagenal and the
other fools think that that will be the ruin of the town."

"But Mottisfont is a Tory," Basset objected.

"So is Peel. They are both in Bagenal's bad books. Bagenal is sure
that Peel is going back to the cotton people he came from. Spinning
Jenny spinning round again!"

"I see."

"I asked him," Audley continued, rubbing his knees with sly enjoyment,
"what Stubbs the lawyer was doing about it. He's the party manager.
Why didn't he come to me?"

Basset smiled. "What did he say to that?"

"Hummed and hawed. At last he said that owing to Stubbs's connection
with--you know who--it was thought that he was not the right person to
come to me. So I asked him what Stubbs's employer was going to do
about it."

"Ah!"

"He didn't know what to say to that, the ass! Thought I should go the
other way, you see. So I told him"--John Audley laughed maliciously as
he spoke--"that, for the landed interest, the law had taken away my
land, and, for politics, I would not give a d--n for either party in a
country where men did not get their rights! Lord! how he looked!"

"Well, you didn't hide your feelings."

"Why should I?" John Audley asked cheerfully. "What will they do for
me? Nothing. Will they move a finger to right me? No. Then a plague on
both their houses!" He snapped his fingers in schoolboy fashion and
rose to his feet. He lit a candle, taking a light from the fire with a
spill. "I am going to bed now, Peter. Unless----" he paused, the
candlestick in his hand, and gazed fixedly at his companion. "Lord,
man, what we could do in two or three hours! In two or three hours.
This very night!"

"I've told you that I will have nothing to do with it!" Basset
repeated.

John Audley sighed, and removing his eyes, poked the wick of the
candle with the snuffers. "Well," he said, "good-night. We must look
to bright eyes and red lips to convert you. What a man won't do for
another he will do for himself, Peter. Good-night."

Left alone, Basset stared fretfully at the fire. It was not the first
time by scores that John Audley had tried him and driven him almost
beyond bearing. But habit is a strong tie, and a common taste is a
bond even stronger. In this room, and from the elder man, Basset had
learned to trace a genealogy, to read a coat, to know a bar from a
bend, to discourse of badges and collars under the guidance of the
learned Anstie or the ingenious Le Neve. There he had spent hours
flitting from book to book and chart to chart in the pursuit, as
thrilling while it lasted as any fox-chase, of some family link, the
origin of this, the end of that, a thing of value only to those who
sought it, but to them all-important. He could recall many a day so
spent while rain lashed the tall mullioned windows or sunlight flooded
the window-seat in the bay; and these days had endeared to him every
nook in the library from the folio shelves in the shadowy corner under
the staircase to the cosey table near the hearth which was called "Mr.
Basset's," and enshrined in a long drawer a tree of the Bassets of
Blore.

For he as well as Audley came of an ancient and shrunken stock. He
also could count among his forbears men who had fought at Blore Heath
and Towton, or had escaped by a neck from the ruin of the Gunpowder
Plot. So he had fallen early under the spell of the elder man's
pursuits, and, still young, had learned from him to live in the past.
Later the romantic solitude of the Gatehouse, where he had spent more
of the last six years than in his own house at Blore, had confirmed
him in the habit.

Under the surface, however, the two men remained singularly unlike.
While a fixed idea had narrowed John Audley's vision to the inhuman,
the younger man, under a dry and reserved exterior--he was shy, and
his undrained acres, his twelve hundred a year, poorly supported an
ancient name--was not only human, but in his way was something of an
idealist. He dreamed dreams, he had his secret aspirations, at times
ambition of the higher kind stirred in him, he planned plans and
another life than this. But always--this was a thing inbred in him--he
put forward the commonplace, as the cuttle-fish sheds ink, and hid
nothing so shyly as the visions which he had done nothing to make
real. On those about him he made no deep impression, though from one
border of Staffordshire to the other his birth won respect. Politics
viewed as a game, and a selfish game, had no attraction for him.
Quarter Sessions and the Bench struck no spark from him. At the Races
and the County Ball richer men outshone him. But given something to
touch his heart and fire his ambition, he had qualities. He might
still show himself in another light.

Something of this, for no reason that he could imagine, some feeling
of regret for past opportunities, passed through his mind as he sat
fretting over John Audley's folly. But after a time he roused himself
and became aware that he was tired; and he rose and lit a candle. He
pushed back the smouldering logs and slowly and methodically he put
out the lights. He gave a last thought to John Audley. "There was
always one maggot in his head," he muttered, "now there's a second.
What I would not do to please him, he thinks I shall do to please
another! Well, he does not know her yet!"

He went to bed.




                             CHAPTER VIII

                            THE GATEHOUSE


It is within the bounds of imagination that death may make no greater
change in our inner selves than is wrought at times by a new mood or
another outlook. When Mary, an hour before the world was astir on the
morning after her arrival, let herself out of the Gatehouse, and from
its threshold as from a ledge saw the broad valley of the Trent
stretched before her in all the beauty of a May morning, her alarm of
the past night seemed incredible. At her feet a sharp slope, clothed
in gorse and shrub, fell away to meet the plain. It sank no more than
a couple of hundred feet, but this was enough to enable her to follow
the silver streak of the river winding afar between park and coppice
and under many a church tower. Away to the right she could see the
three graceful spires of Lichfield, and southward, where an opal haze
closed the prospect, she could imagine the fringe of the Black
Country, made beautiful by distance.

In sober fact few parts of England are less inviting than the low
lands of Staffordshire, when the spring floods cover them or the fogs
of autumn cling to the cold soil. But in spring, when larks soar above
them and tall, lop-sided elms outline the fields, they have their
beauty; and Mary gazed long at the fair prospect before she turned her
back on it and looked at the house that was fated to be her home.

It was what its name signified, a gatehouse; yet by turns it could be
a sombre and a charming thing. Some Audley of noble ideas, a man long
dead, had built it to be the entrance to his demesne. The park wall,
overhung by trees, still ran right and left from it, but the road
which had once passed through the archway now slid humbly aside and
entered the park by a field gate. A wide-latticed Tudor tower, rising
two stories above the arch and turreted at the four corners, formed
the middle. It was buttressed on either hand by a lower building,
flush with it and of about the same width. The tower was of yellowish
stone, the wings were faced with stained stucco. Right and left of the
whole a plot of shrubs masked on the one hand the stables, on the
other the kitchens--modern blocks set back to such a distance that
each touched the old part at a corner only.

He who had planned the building had set it cunningly on the brow of
the Great Chase, so that, viewed from the vale, it rose against the
skyline. On dark days it broke the fringe of woodland and stood up,
gloomy and forbidding, the portal of a Doubting Castle. On bright
days, with its hundred diamond panes a-glitter in the sunshine, it
seemed to be the porch of a fairy palace, the silent home of some
Sleeping Beauty. At all times it imposed itself upon men below and
spoke of something beyond, something unseen, greater, mysterious.

To Mary Audley, who saw it at its best, the very stains of the plaster
glorified by the morning light, it was a thing of joy. She fancied
that to live behind those ancient mullioned windows, to look out
morning and evening on that spacious landscape, to feel the bustle of
the world so remote, must in itself be happiness. For a time she could
not turn from it.

But presently the desire to explore her new surroundings seized her
and she re-entered the house. A glance at the groined roof of the
hall--many a gallant horseman had ridden under it in his time--proved
that it was merely the archway closed and fitted with a small door and
window at either end. She unlocked the farther door and passed into a
paved court, in which the grass grew between the worn flags. In the
stables on the left a dog whined. The kitchens were on the other hand,
and before her an opening flanked by tall heraldic beasts broke a low
wall, built of moss-grown brick. She ventured through it and uttered a
cry of delight.

Near at hand, under cover of a vast chestnut tree, were traces of
domestic labor: a grindstone, a saw-pit, a woodpile, coops with
clucking hens. But beyond these the sward, faintly lined at first with
ruts, stretched away into forest glades, bordered here by giant oaks
brown in bud, there by the yellowish-green of beech trees. In the
foreground lay patches of gorse, and in places an ancient thorn, riven
and half prostrate, crowned the russet of last year's bracken with a
splash of cream. Heedless of the spectator, rabbits sat making their
toilet, and from every brake birds filled the air with a riot of song.

To one who had seen little but the streets of Paris, more sordid then
than now, the scene was charming. Mary's eyes filled, her heart
swelled. Ah, what a home was here! She had espied on her journey many
a nook and sheltered dell, but nothing that could vie with this!
Heedless of her thin shoes, with no more than a handkerchief on her
head, she strayed on and on. By and by a track, faintly marked, led
her to the left. A little farther, and old trees fell into line on
either hand, as if in days long gone, before age thinned their ranks,
they had formed an avenue.

For a time she sat musing on a fallen trunk, then the hawthorn that a
few paces away perfumed the spring air moved her to gather an armful
of it. She forgot that time was passing, almost she forgot that she
had not breakfasted, and she might have been nearly a mile from the
Gatehouse when she was startled by a faint hail that seemed to come
from behind her. She looked back and saw Basset coming after her.

He, too, was hatless--he had set off in haste--and he was out of
breath. She turned with concern to meet him. "Am I very late, Mr.
Basset?" she asked, her conscience pricking her. What if this first
morning she had broken the rules?

"Oh no," he said. And then, "You've not been farther than this?"

"No. I am afraid my uncle is waiting?"

"Oh no. He breakfasts in his own room. But Etruria told me that
you had gone this way, and I followed. I see that you are not
empty-handed."

"No." And she thrust the great bunch of may under his nose--who would
not have been gay, who would not have lost her reserve in such a
scene, on such a morning? "Isn't it fresh? Isn't it delicious?"

As he stooped to the flowers his eyes met hers smiling through the
hawthorn sprays, and he saw her as he had not seen her before. Her
gravity had left her. Spring laughed in her eyes, youth fluttered in
the tendrils of her hair, she was the soul of May. And what she had
found of beauty in the woodland, of music in the larks' songs, of
perfume in the blossoms, of freshness in the morning, the man found in
her; and a shock, never to be forgotten, ran through him. He did not
speak. He smelled the hawthorn in silence.

But a few seconds later--as men reckon time--he took note of his
feelings, and he was startled. He had not been prepared to like her,
we know; many things had armed him against her. But before the
witchery of her morning face, the challenge of her laughing eyes, he
awoke to the fact that he was in danger. He had to own that if he must
live beside her day by day and would maintain his indifference, he
must steel himself. He must keep his first impressions of her always
before him, and be careful. And be very careful--if even that might
avail.

For a hundred paces he walked at her side, listening without knowing
what she said. Then his coolness returned, and when she asked him why
he had come after her without his hat he was ready.

"I had better tell you," he answered, "this path is little used. It
leads to the Great House, and your uncle, owing to his quarrel with
Lord Audley, does not like any one to go farther in that direction
than the Yew Tree Walk. You can see the Walk from here--the yews mark
the entrance to the gardens. I thought that it would be unfortunate if
