from the apes. They say this, not at all suspecting that thousands of
years ago that same law of necessity which with such ardor they are now
trying to prove by physiology and comparative zoology was not merely
acknowledged by all the religions and all the thinkers, but has never
been denied. They do not see that the role of the natural sciences in
this matter is merely to serve as an instrument for the illumination
of one side of it. For the fact that, from the point of view of
observation, reason and the will are merely secretions of the brain, and
that man following the general law may have developed from lower animals
at some unknown period of time, only explains from a fresh side
the truth admitted thousands of years ago by all the religious and
philosophic theories--that from the point of view of reason man is
subject to the law of necessity; but it does not advance by a hair's
breadth the solution of the question, which has another, opposite, side,
based on the consciousness of freedom.

If men descended from the apes at an unknown period of time, that is
as comprehensible as that they were made from a handful of earth at a
certain period of time (in the first case the unknown quantity is the
time, in the second case it is the origin); and the question of how
man's consciousness of freedom is to be reconciled with the law of
necessity to which he is subject cannot be solved by comparative
physiology and zoology, for in a frog, a rabbit, or an ape, we can
observe only the muscular nervous activity, but in man we observe
consciousness as well as the muscular and nervous activity.

The naturalists and their followers, thinking they can solve this
question, are like plasterers set to plaster one side of the walls of
a church who, availing themselves of the absence of the chief
superintendent of the work, should in an access of zeal plaster over the
windows, icons, woodwork, and still unbuttressed walls, and should be
delighted that from their point of view as plasterers, everything is now
so smooth and regular.





CHAPTER IX


For the solution of the question of free will or inevitability, history
has this advantage over other branches of knowledge in which the
question is dealt with, that for history this question does not refer
to the essence of man's free will but its manifestation in the past and
under certain conditions.

In regard to this question, history stands to the other sciences as
experimental science stands to abstract science.

The subject for history is not man's will itself but our presentation of
it.

And so for history, the insoluble mystery presented by the
incompatibility of free will and inevitability does not exist as it does
for theology, ethics, and philosophy. History surveys a presentation of
man's life in which the union of these two contradictions has already
taken place.

In actual life each historic event, each human action, is very clearly
and definitely understood without any sense of contradiction, although
each event presents itself as partly free and partly compulsory.

To solve the question of how freedom and necessity are combined and
what constitutes the essence of these two conceptions, the philosophy
of history can and should follow a path contrary to that taken by other
sciences. Instead of first defining the conceptions of freedom and
inevitability in themselves, and then ranging the phenomena of life
under those definitions, history should deduce a definition of the
conception of freedom and inevitability themselves from the immense
quantity of phenomena of which it is cognizant and that always appear
dependent on these two elements.

Whatever presentation of the activity of many men or of an individual
we may consider, we always regard it as the result partly of man's free
will and partly of the law of inevitability.

Whether we speak of the migration of the peoples and the incursions
of the barbarians, or of the decrees of Napoleon III, or of someone's
action an hour ago in choosing one direction out of several for his
walk, we are unconscious of any contradiction. The degree of freedom and
inevitability governing the actions of these people is clearly defined
for us.

Our conception of the degree of freedom often varies according to
differences in the point of view from which we regard the event, but
every human action appears to us as a certain combination of freedom and
inevitability. In every action we examine we see a certain measure of
freedom and a certain measure of inevitability. And always the more
freedom we see in any action the less inevitability do we perceive, and
the more inevitability the less freedom.

The proportion of freedom to inevitability decreases and increases
according to the point of view from which the action is regarded, but
their relation is always one of inverse proportion.

A sinking man who clutches at another and drowns him; or a hungry mother
exhausted by feeding her baby, who steals some food; or a man trained
to discipline who on duty at the word of command kills a defenseless
man--seem less guilty, that is, less free and more subject to the law of
necessity, to one who knows the circumstances in which these people were
placed, and more free to one who does not know that the man was himself
drowning, that the mother was hungry, that the soldier was in the ranks,
and so on. Similarly a man who committed a murder twenty years ago and
has since lived peaceably and harmlessly in society seems less guilty
and his action more due to the law of inevitability, to someone who
considers his action after twenty years have elapsed than to one who
examined it the day after it was committed. And in the same way every
action of an insane, intoxicated, or highly excited man appears less
free and more inevitable to one who knows the mental condition of him
who committed the action, and seems more free and less inevitable to one
who does not know it. In all these cases the conception of freedom
is increased or diminished and the conception of compulsion is
correspondingly decreased or increased, according to the point of view
from which the action is regarded. So that the greater the conception of
necessity the smaller the conception of freedom and vice versa.

Religion, the common sense of mankind, the science of jurisprudence,
and history itself understand alike this relation between necessity and
freedom.

All cases without exception in which our conception of freedom and
necessity is increased and diminished depend on three considerations:

(1) The relation to the external world of the man who commits the deeds.

(2) His relation to time.

(3) His relation to the causes leading to the action.

The first consideration is the clearness of our perception of the man's
relation to the external world and the greater or lesser clearness
of our understanding of the definite position occupied by the man
in relation to everything coexisting with him. This is what makes it
evident that a drowning man is less free and more subject to necessity
than one standing on dry ground, and that makes the actions of a man
closely connected with others in a thickly populated district, or of one
bound by family, official, or business duties, seem certainly less free
and more subject to necessity than those of a man living in solitude and
seclusion.

If we consider a man alone, apart from his relation to everything around
him, each action of his seems to us free. But if we see his relation
to anything around him, if we see his connection with anything
whatever--with a man who speaks to him, a book he reads, the work on
which he is engaged, even with the air he breathes or the light that
falls on the things about him--we see that each of these circumstances
has an influence on him and controls at least some side of his activity.
And the more we perceive of these influences the more our conception of
his freedom diminishes and the more our conception of the necessity that
weighs on him increases.

The second consideration is the more or less evident time relation of
the man to the world and the clearness of our perception of the place
the man's action occupies in time. That is the ground which makes the
fall of the first man, resulting in the production of the human race,
appear evidently less free than a man's entry into marriage today. It is
the reason why the life and activity of people who lived centuries ago
and are connected with me in time cannot seem to me as free as the life
of a contemporary, the consequences of which are still unknown to me.

The degree of our conception of freedom or inevitability depends in this
respect on the greater or lesser lapse of time between the performance
of the action and our judgment of it.

If I examine an act I performed a moment ago in approximately the same
circumstances as those I am in now, my action appears to me undoubtedly
free. But if I examine an act performed a month ago, then being in
different circumstances, I cannot help recognizing that if that act had
not been committed much that resulted from it--good, agreeable, and even
essential--would not have taken place. If I reflect on an action still
more remote, ten years ago or more, then the consequences of my action
are still plainer to me and I find it hard to imagine what would have
happened had that action not been performed. The farther I go back
in memory, or what is the same thing the farther I go forward in my
judgment, the more doubtful becomes my belief in the freedom of my
action.

In history we find a very similar progress of conviction concerning
the part played by free will in the general affairs of humanity. A
contemporary event seems to us to be indubitably the doing of all the
known participants, but with a more remote event we already see its
inevitable results which prevent our considering anything else possible.
And the farther we go back in examining events the less arbitrary do
they appear.

The Austro-Prussian war appears to us undoubtedly the result of the
crafty conduct of Bismarck, and so on. The Napoleonic wars still seem
to us, though already questionably, to be the outcome of their heroes'
will. But in the Crusades we already see an event occupying its definite
place in history and without which we cannot imagine the modern history
of Europe, though to the chroniclers of the Crusades that event appeared
as merely due to the will of certain people. In regard to the migration
of the peoples it does not enter anyone's head today to suppose that
the renovation of the European world depended on Attila's caprice. The
farther back in history the object of our observation lies, the more
doubtful does the free will of those concerned in the event become and
the more manifest the law of inevitability.

The third consideration is the degree to which we apprehend that
endless chain of causation inevitably demanded by reason, in which each
phenomenon comprehended, and therefore man's every action, must have
its definite place as a result of what has gone before and as a cause of
what will follow.

The better we are acquainted with the physiological, psychological, and
historical laws deduced by observation and by which man is controlled,
and the more correctly we perceive the physiological, psychological,
and historical causes of the action, and the simpler the action we are
observing and the less complex the character and mind of the man in
question, the more subject to inevitability and the less free do our
actions and those of others appear.

When we do not at all understand the cause of an action, whether a
crime, a good action, or even one that is simply nonmoral, we ascribe a
greater amount of freedom to it. In the case of a crime we most urgently
demand the punishment for such an act; in the case of a virtuous act we
rate its merit most highly. In an indifferent case we recognize in it
more individuality, originality, and independence. But if even one of
the innumerable causes of the act is known to us we recognize a certain
element of necessity and are less insistent on punishment for the crime,
or the acknowledgment of the merit of the virtuous act, or the freedom
of the apparently original action. That a criminal was reared among male
factors mitigates his fault in our eyes. The self-sacrifice of a father
or mother, or self-sacrifice with the possibility of a reward, is more
comprehensible than gratuitous self-sacrifice, and therefore seems less
deserving of sympathy and less the result of free will. The founder of a
sect or party, or an inventor, impresses us less when we know how or by
what the way was prepared for his activity. If we have a large range
of examples, if our observation is constantly directed to seeking the
correlation of cause and effect in people's actions, their actions
appear to us more under compulsion and less free the more correctly we
connect the effects with the causes. If we examined simple actions and
had a vast number of such actions under observation, our conception of
their inevitability would be still greater. The dishonest conduct of the
son of a dishonest father, the misconduct of a woman who had fallen
into bad company, a drunkard's relapse into drunkenness, and so on are
actions that seem to us less free the better we understand their cause.
If the man whose actions we are considering is on a very low stage
of mental development, like a child, a madman, or a simpleton--then,
knowing the causes of the act and the simplicity of the character and
intelligence in question, we see so large an element of necessity and so
little free will that as soon as we know the cause prompting the action
we can foretell the result.

On these three considerations alone is based the conception of
irresponsibility for crimes and the extenuating circumstances admitted
by all legislative codes. The responsibility appears greater or less
according to our greater or lesser knowledge of the circumstances in
which the man was placed whose action is being judged, and according
to the greater or lesser interval of time between the commission of the
action and its investigation, and according to the greater or lesser
understanding of the causes that led to the action.





CHAPTER X


Thus our conception of free will and inevitability gradually diminishes
or increases according to the greater or lesser connection with the
external world, the greater or lesser remoteness of time, and the
greater or lesser dependence on the causes in relation to which we
contemplate a man's life.

So that if we examine the case of a man whose connection with the
external world is well known, where the time between the action and
its examination is great, and where the causes of the action are most
accessible, we get the conception of a maximum of inevitability and a
minimum of free will. If we examine a man little dependent on external
conditions, whose action was performed very recently, and the causes of
whose action are beyond our ken, we get the conception of a minimum of
inevitability and a maximum of freedom.

In neither case--however we may change our point of view, however plain
we may make to ourselves the connection between the man and the external
world, however inaccessible it may be to us, however long or short the
period of time, however intelligible or incomprehensible the causes
of the action may be--can we ever conceive either complete freedom or
complete necessity.

(1) To whatever degree we may imagine a man to be exempt from the
influence of the external world, we never get a conception of freedom
in space. Every human action is inevitably conditioned by what surrounds
him and by his own body. I lift my arm and let it fall. My action seems
to me free; but asking myself whether I could raise my arm in every
direction, I see that I raised it in the direction in which there was
least obstruction to that action either from things around me or from
the construction of my own body. I chose one out of all the possible
directions because in it there were fewest obstacles. For my action
to be free it was necessary that it should encounter no obstacles. To
conceive of a man being free we must imagine him outside space, which is
evidently impossible.

(2) However much we approximate the time of judgment to the time of the
deed, we never get a conception of freedom in time. For if I examine
an action committed a second ago I must still recognize it as not
being free, for it is irrevocably linked to the moment at which it was
committed. Can I lift my arm? I lift it, but ask myself: could I have
abstained from lifting my arm at the moment that has already passed? To
convince myself of this I do not lift it the next moment. But I am
not now abstaining from doing so at the first moment when I asked the
question. Time has gone by which I could not detain, the arm I then
lifted is no longer the same as the arm I now refrain from lifting,
nor is the air in which I lifted it the same that now surrounds me. The
moment in which the first movement was made is irrevocable, and at that
moment I could make only one movement, and whatever movement I made
would be the only one. That I did not lift my arm a moment later does
not prove that I could have abstained from lifting it then. And since I
could make only one movement at that single moment of time, it could not
have been any other. To imagine it as free, it is necessary to imagine
it in the present, on the boundary between the past and the future--that
is, outside time, which is impossible.

(3) However much the difficulty of understanding the causes may be
increased, we never reach a conception of complete freedom, that is,
an absence of cause. However inaccessible to us may be the cause of the
expression of will in any action, our own or another's, the first demand
of reason is the assumption of and search for a cause, for without a
cause no phenomenon is conceivable. I raise my arm to perform an action
independently of any cause, but my wish to perform an action without a
cause is the cause of my action.

But even if--imagining a man quite exempt from all influences, examining
only his momentary action in the present, unevoked by any cause--we were
to admit so infinitely small a remainder of inevitability as equaled
zero, we should even then not have arrived at the conception of complete
freedom in man, for a being uninfluenced by the external world, standing
outside of time and independent of cause, is no longer a man.

In the same way we can never imagine the action of a man quite devoid of
freedom and entirely subject to the law of inevitability.

(1) However we may increase our knowledge of the conditions of space
in which man is situated, that knowledge can never be complete, for the
number of those conditions is as infinite as the infinity of space. And
therefore so long as not all the conditions influencing men are defined,
there is no complete inevitability but a certain measure of freedom
remains.

(2) However we may prolong the period of time between the action we are
examining and the judgment upon it, that period will be finite, while
time is infinite, and so in this respect too there can never be absolute
inevitability.

(3) However accessible may be the chain of causation of any action, we
shall never know the whole chain since it is endless, and so again we
never reach absolute inevitability.

But besides this, even if, admitting the remaining minimum of freedom to
equal zero, we assumed in some given case--as for instance in that of a
dying man, an unborn babe, or an idiot--complete absence of freedom, by
so doing we should destroy the very conception of man in the case we are
examining, for as soon as there is no freedom there is also no man. And
so the conception of the action of a man subject solely to the law of
inevitability without any element of freedom is just as impossible as
the conception of a man's completely free action.

And so to imagine the action of a man entirely subject to the law of
inevitability without any freedom, we must assume the knowledge of an
infinite number of space relations, an infinitely long period of time,
and an infinite series of causes.

To imagine a man perfectly free and not subject to the law of
inevitability, we must imagine him all alone, beyond space, beyond time,
and free from dependence on cause.

In the first case, if inevitability were possible without freedom
we should have reached a definition of inevitability by the laws of
inevitability itself, that is, a mere form without content.

In the second case, if freedom were possible without inevitability we
should have arrived at unconditioned freedom beyond space, time, and
cause, which by the fact of its being unconditioned and unlimited would
be nothing, or mere content without form.

We should in fact have reached those two fundamentals of which man's
whole outlook on the universe is constructed--the incomprehensible
essence of life, and the laws defining that essence.

Reason says: (1) space with all the forms of matter that give it
visibility is infinite, and cannot be imagined otherwise. (2) Time is
infinite motion without a moment of rest and is unthinkable otherwise.
(3) The connection between cause and effect has no beginning and can
have no end.

Consciousness says: (1) I alone am, and all that exists is but me,
consequently I include space. (2) I measure flowing time by the fixed
moment of the present in which alone I am conscious of myself as living,
consequently I am outside time. (3) I am beyond cause, for I feel myself
to be the cause of every manifestation of my life.

Reason gives expression to the laws of inevitability. Consciousness
gives expression to the essence of freedom.

Freedom not limited by anything is the essence of life, in man's
consciousness. Inevitability without content is man's reason in its
three forms.

Freedom is the thing examined. Inevitability is what examines. Freedom
is the content. Inevitability is the form.

Only by separating the two sources of cognition, related to one another
as form to content, do we get the mutually exclusive and separately
incomprehensible conceptions of freedom and inevitability.

Only by uniting them do we get a clear conception of man's life.

Apart from these two concepts which in their union mutually define one
another as form and content, no conception of life is possible.

All that we know of the life of man is merely a certain relation of free
will to inevitability, that is, of consciousness to the laws of reason.

All that we know of the external world of nature is only a certain
relation of the forces of nature to inevitability, or of the essence of
life to the laws of reason.

The great natural forces lie outside us and we are not conscious of
them; we call those forces gravitation, inertia, electricity, animal
force, and so on, but we are conscious of the force of life in man and
we call that freedom.

But just as the force of gravitation, incomprehensible in itself but
felt by every man, is understood by us only to the extent to which we
know the laws of inevitability to which it is subject (from the first
knowledge that all bodies have weight, up to Newton's law), so too the
force of free will, incomprehensible in itself but of which everyone is
conscious, is intelligible to us only in as far as we know the laws of
inevitability to which it is subject (from the fact that every man dies,
up to the knowledge of the most complex economic and historic laws).

All knowledge is merely a bringing of this essence of life under the
laws of reason.

Man's free will differs from every other force in that man is directly
conscious of it, but in the eyes of reason it in no way differs from
any other force. The forces of gravitation, electricity, or chemical
affinity are only distinguished from one another in that they are
differently defined by reason. Just so the force of man's free will
is distinguished by reason from the other forces of nature only by the
definition reason gives it. Freedom, apart from necessity, that is,
apart from the laws of reason that define it, differs in no way from
gravitation, or heat, or the force that makes things grow; for reason,
it is only a momentary undefinable sensation of life.

And as the undefinable essence of the force moving the heavenly bodies,
the undefinable essence of the forces of heat and electricity, or
of chemical affinity, or of the vital force, forms the content of
astronomy, physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, and so on, just in the
same way does the force of free will form the content of history.
But just as the subject of every science is the manifestation of this
unknown essence of life while that essence itself can only be the
subject of metaphysics, even the manifestation of the force of free will
in human beings in space, in time, and in dependence on cause forms
the subject of history, while free will itself is the subject of
metaphysics.

In the experimental sciences what we know we call the laws of
inevitability, what is unknown to us we call vital force. Vital force is
only an expression for the unknown remainder over and above what we know
of the essence of life.

So also in history what is known to us we call laws of inevitability,
what is unknown we call free will. Free will is for history only an
expression for the unknown remainder of what we know about the laws of
human life.





CHAPTER XI


History examines the manifestations of man's free will in connection
with the external world in time and in dependence on cause, that is, it
defines this freedom by the laws of reason, and so history is a science
only in so far as this free will is defined by those laws.

The recognition of man's free will as something capable of influencing
historical events, that is, as not subject to laws, is the same for
history as the recognition of a free force moving the heavenly bodies
would be for astronomy.

That assumption would destroy the possibility of the existence of laws,
that is, of any science whatever. If there is even a single body
moving freely, then the laws of Kepler and Newton are negatived and no
conception of the movement of the heavenly bodies any longer exists. If
any single action is due to free will, then not a single historical law
can exist, nor any conception of historical events.

For history, lines exist of the movement of human wills, one end
of which is hidden in the unknown but at the other end of which a
consciousness of man's will in the present moves in space, time, and
dependence on cause.

The more this field of motion spreads out before our eyes, the more
evident are the laws of that movement. To discover and define those laws
is the problem of history.

From the standpoint from which the science of history now regards its
subject on the path it now follows, seeking the causes of events in
man's freewill, a scientific enunciation of those laws is impossible,
for however man's free will may be restricted, as soon as we recognize
it as a force not subject to law, the existence of law becomes
impossible.

Only by reducing this element of free will to the infinitesimal, that
is, by regarding it as an infinitely small quantity, can we convince
ourselves of the absolute inaccessibility of the causes, and then
instead of seeking causes, history will take the discovery of laws as
its problem.

The search for these laws has long been begun and the new methods of
thought which history must adopt are being worked out simultaneously
with the self-destruction toward which--ever dissecting and dissecting
the causes of phenomena--the old method of history is moving.

All human sciences have traveled along that path. Arriving at
infinitesimals, mathematics, the most exact of sciences, abandons the
process of analysis and enters on the new process of the integration
of unknown, infinitely small, quantities. Abandoning the conception
of cause, mathematics seeks law, that is, the property common to all
unknown, infinitely small, elements.

In another form but along the same path of reflection the other sciences
have proceeded. When Newton enunciated the law of gravity he did not say
that the sun or the earth had a property of attraction; he said that all
bodies from the largest to the smallest have the property of attracting
one another, that is, leaving aside the question of the cause of the
movement of the bodies, he expressed the property common to all bodies
from the infinitely large to the infinitely small. The same is done by
the natural sciences: leaving aside the question of cause, they seek for
laws. History stands on the same path. And if history has for its object
the study of the movement of the nations and of humanity and not the
narration of episodes in the lives of individuals, it too, setting
aside the conception of cause, should seek the laws common to all the
inseparably interconnected infinitesimal elements of free will.





CHAPTER XII


From the time the law of Copernicus was discovered and proved, the mere
recognition of the fact that it was not the sun but the earth that moves
sufficed to destroy the whole cosmography of the ancients. By disproving
that law it might have been possible to retain the old conception of
the movements of the bodies, but without disproving it, it would seem
impossible to continue studying the Ptolemaic worlds. But even after
the discovery of the law of Copernicus the Ptolemaic worlds were still
studied for a long time.

From the time the first person said and proved that the number of births
or of crimes is subject to mathematical laws, and that this or that
mode of government is determined by certain geographical and economic
conditions, and that certain relations of population to soil produce
migrations of peoples, the foundations on which history had been built
were destroyed in their essence.

By refuting these new laws the former view of history might have been
retained; but without refuting them it would seem impossible to continue
studying historic events as the results of man's free will. For if a
certain mode of government was established or certain migrations
of peoples took place in consequence of such and such geographic,
ethnographic, or economic conditions, then the free will of those
individuals who appear to us to have established that mode of government
or occasioned the migrations can no longer be regarded as the cause.

And yet the former history continues to be studied side by side with the
laws of statistics, geography, political economy, comparative philology,
and geology, which directly contradict its assumptions.

The struggle between the old views and the new was long and stubbornly
fought out in physical philosophy. Theology stood on guard for the
old views and accused the new of violating revelation. But when truth
conquered, theology established itself just as firmly on the new
foundation.

Just as prolonged and stubborn is the struggle now proceeding between
the old and the new conception of history, and theology in the same way
stands on guard for the old view, and accuses the new view of subverting
revelation.

In the one case as in the other, on both sides the struggle provokes
passion and stifles truth. On the one hand there is fear and regret for
the loss of the whole edifice constructed through the ages, on the other
is the passion for destruction.

To the men who fought against the rising truths of physical philosophy,
it seemed that if they admitted that truth it would destroy faith in
God, in the creation of the firmament, and in the miracle of Joshua the
son of Nun. To the defenders of the laws of Copernicus and Newton, to
Voltaire for example, it seemed that the laws of astronomy destroyed
religion, and he utilized the law of gravitation as a weapon against
religion.

Just so it now seems as if we have only to admit the law of
inevitability, to destroy the conception of the soul, of good and evil,
and all the institutions of state and church that have been built up on
those conceptions.

So too, like Voltaire in his time, uninvited defenders of the law of
inevitability today use that law as a weapon against religion, though
the law of inevitability in history, like the law of Copernicus in
astronomy, far from destroying, even strengthens the foundation on which
the institutions of state and church are erected.

As in the question of astronomy then, so in the question of history
now, the whole difference of opinion is based on the recognition or
nonrecognition of something absolute, serving as the measure of visible
phenomena. In astronomy it was the immovability of the earth, in history
it is the independence of personality--free will.

As with astronomy the difficulty of recognizing the motion of the earth
lay in abandoning the immediate sensation of the earth's fixity and of
the motion of the planets, so in history the difficulty of recognizing
the subjection of personality to the laws of space, time, and cause
lies in renouncing the direct feeling of the independence of one's own
personality. But as in astronomy the new view said: "It is true that we
do not feel the movement of the earth, but by admitting its immobility
we arrive at absurdity, while by admitting its motion (which we do not
feel) we arrive at laws," so also in history the new view says: "It is
true that we are not conscious of our dependence, but by admitting our
free will we arrive at absurdity, while by admitting our dependence on
the external world, on time, and on cause, we arrive at laws."

In the first case it was necessary to renounce the consciousness of an
unreal immobility in space and to recognize a motion we did not feel;
in the present case it is similarly necessary to renounce a freedom
that does not exist, and to recognize a dependence of which we are not
conscious.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of War and Peace, by Leo Tolstoy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAR AND PEACE ***

***** This file should be named 2600.txt or 2600.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/0/2600/

An Anonymous Volunteer

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
Project Gutenberg's The Idiot, by (AKA Feodor Dostoevsky) Fyodor Dostoyevsky

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Idiot

Author: (AKA Feodor Dostoevsky) Fyodor Dostoyevsky

Translator: Eva Martin

Posting Date: December 22, 2008 [EBook #2638]
Release Date: May, 2001

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IDIOT ***




Produced by Martin Adamson





THE IDIOT

By Fyodor Dostoyevsky


Translated by Eva Martin




PART I

I.

Towards the end of November, during a thaw, at nine o'clock one morning,
a train on the Warsaw and Petersburg railway was approaching the latter
city at full speed. The morning was so damp and misty that it was only
with great difficulty that the day succeeded in breaking; and it was
impossible to distinguish anything more than a few yards away from the
carriage windows.

Some of the passengers by this particular train were returning from
abroad; but the third-class carriages were the best filled, chiefly with
insignificant persons of various occupations and degrees, picked up at
the different stations nearer town. All of them seemed weary, and
most of them had sleepy eyes and a shivering expression, while their
complexions generally appeared to have taken on the colour of the fog
outside.

When day dawned, two passengers in one of the third-class carriages
found themselves opposite each other. Both were young fellows, both
were rather poorly dressed, both had remarkable faces, and both were
evidently anxious to start a conversation. If they had but known why,
at this particular moment, they were both remarkable persons, they would
undoubtedly have wondered at the strange chance which had set them down
opposite to one another in a third-class carriage of the Warsaw Railway
Company.

One of them was a young fellow of about twenty-seven, not tall, with
black curling hair, and small, grey, fiery eyes. His nose was broad
and flat, and he had high cheek bones; his thin lips were constantly
compressed into an impudent, ironical--it might almost be called a
malicious--smile; but his forehead was high and well formed, and atoned
for a good deal of the ugliness of the lower part of his face. A special
feature of this physiognomy was its death-like pallor, which gave to
the whole man an indescribably emaciated appearance in spite of his hard
look, and at the same time a sort of passionate and suffering expression
which did not harmonize with his impudent, sarcastic smile and
keen, self-satisfied bearing. He wore a large fur--or rather
astrachan--overcoat, which had kept him warm all night, while his
neighbour had been obliged to bear the full severity of a Russian
November night entirely unprepared. His wide sleeveless mantle with a
large cape to it--the sort of cloak one sees upon travellers during the
winter months in Switzerland or North Italy--was by no means adapted to
the long cold journey through Russia, from Eydkuhnen to St. Petersburg.

The wearer of this cloak was a young fellow, also of about twenty-six or
twenty-seven years of age, slightly above the middle height, very fair,
with a thin, pointed and very light coloured beard; his eyes were large
and blue, and had an intent look about them, yet that heavy expression
which some people affirm to be a peculiarity as well as evidence, of an
epileptic subject. His face was decidedly a pleasant one for all that;
refined, but quite colourless, except for the circumstance that at this
moment it was blue with cold. He held a bundle made up of an old faded
silk handkerchief that apparently contained all his travelling wardrobe,
and wore thick shoes and gaiters, his whole appearance being very
un-Russian.

His black-haired neighbour inspected these peculiarities, having nothing
better to do, and at length remarked, with that rude enjoyment of the
discomforts of others which the common classes so often show:

"Cold?"

"Very," said his neighbour, readily, "and this is a thaw, too. Fancy if
it had been a hard frost! I never thought it would be so cold in the old
country. I've grown quite out of the way of it."

"What, been abroad, I suppose?"

"Yes, straight from Switzerland."

"Wheugh! my goodness!" The black-haired young fellow whistled, and then
laughed.

The conversation proceeded. The readiness of the fair-haired young
man in the cloak to answer all his opposite neighbour's questions
was surprising. He seemed to have no suspicion of any impertinence
or inappropriateness in the fact of such questions being put to him.
Replying to them, he made known to the inquirer that he certainly had
been long absent from Russia, more than four years; that he had been
sent abroad for his health; that he had suffered from some strange
nervous malady--a kind of epilepsy, with convulsive spasms. His
interlocutor burst out laughing several times at his answers; and
more than ever, when to the question, "whether he had been cured?" the
patient replied:

"No, they did not cure me."

"Hey! that's it! You stumped up your money for nothing, and we
believe in those fellows, here!" remarked the black-haired individual,
sarcastically.

"Gospel truth, sir, Gospel truth!" exclaimed another passenger, a
shabbily dressed man of about forty, who looked like a clerk, and
possessed a red nose and a very blotchy face. "Gospel truth! All they do
is to get hold of our good Russian money free, gratis, and for nothing."

"Oh, but you're quite wrong in my particular instance," said the Swiss
patient, quietly. "Of course I can't argue the matter, because I
know only my own case; but my doctor gave me money--and he had very
little--to pay my journey back, besides having kept me at his own
expense, while there, for nearly two years."

"Why? Was there no one else to pay for you?" asked the black-haired one.

"No--Mr. Pavlicheff, who had been supporting me there, died a couple
of years ago. I wrote to Mrs. General Epanchin at the time (she is a
distant relative of mine), but she did not answer my letter. And so
eventually I came back."

"And where have you come to?"

"That is--where am I going to stay? I--I really don't quite know yet,
I--"

Both the listeners laughed again.

"I suppose your whole set-up is in that bundle, then?" asked the first.

"I bet anything it is!" exclaimed the red-nosed passenger, with
extreme satisfaction, "and that he has precious little in the luggage
van!--though of course poverty is no crime--we must remember that!"

It appeared that it was indeed as they had surmised. The young fellow
hastened to admit the fact with wonderful readiness.

"Your bundle has some importance, however," continued the clerk, when
they had laughed their fill (it was observable that the subject of their
mirth joined in the laughter when he saw them laughing); "for though I
dare say it is not stuffed full of friedrichs d'or and louis d'or--judge
from your costume and gaiters--still--if you can add to your possessions
such a valuable property as a relation like Mrs. General Epanchin, then
your bundle becomes a significant object at once. That is, of course, if
you really are a relative of Mrs. Epanchin's, and have not made a little
error through--well, absence of mind, which is very common to human
beings; or, say--through a too luxuriant fancy?"

"Oh, you are right again," said the fair-haired traveller, "for I
really am _almost_ wrong when I say she and I are related. She is hardly
a relation at all; so little, in fact, that I was not in the least
surprised to have no answer to my letter. I expected as much."

"H'm! you spent your postage for nothing, then. H'm! you are candid,
however--and that is commendable. H'm! Mrs. Epanchin--oh yes! a most
eminent person. I know her. As for Mr. Pavlicheff, who supported you in
Switzerland, I know him too--at least, if it was Nicolai Andreevitch
of that name? A fine fellow he was--and had a property of four thousand
souls in his day."

"Yes, Nicolai Andreevitch--that was his name," and the young fellow
looked earnestly and with curiosity at the all-knowing gentleman with
the red nose.

This sort of character is met with pretty frequently in a certain class.
They are people who know everyone--that is, they know where a man is
employed, what his salary is, whom he knows, whom he married, what money
his wife had, who are his cousins, and second cousins, etc., etc. These
men generally have about a hundred pounds a year to live on, and they
spend their whole time and talents in the amassing of this style of
knowledge, which they reduce--or raise--to the standard of a science.

During the latter part of the conversation the black-haired young man
had become very impatient. He stared out of the window, and fidgeted,
and evidently longed for the end of the journey. He was very absent;
he would appear to listen-and heard nothing; and he would laugh of a
sudden, evidently with no idea of what he was laughing about.

"Excuse me," said the red-nosed man to the young fellow with the bundle,
rather suddenly; "whom have I the honour to be talking to?"

"Prince Lef Nicolaievitch Muishkin," replied the latter, with perfect
readiness.

"Prince Muishkin? Lef Nicolaievitch? H'm! I don't know, I'm sure! I may
say I have never heard of such a person," said the clerk, thoughtfully.
"At least, the name, I admit, is historical. Karamsin must mention the
family name, of course, in his history--but as an individual--one never
hears of any Prince Muishkin nowadays."

"Of course not," replied the prince; "there are none, except myself.
I believe I am the last and only one. As to my forefathers, they have
always been a poor lot; my own father was a sublieutenant in the army. I
don't know how Mrs. Epanchin comes into the Muishkin family, but she is
descended from the Princess Muishkin, and she, too, is the last of her
line."

"And did you learn science and all that, with your professor over
there?" asked the black-haired passenger.

"Oh yes--I did learn a little, but--"

"I've never learned anything whatever," said the other.

"Oh, but I learned very little, you know!" added the prince, as though
excusing himself. "They could not teach me very much on account of my
illness."

"Do you know the Rogojins?" asked his questioner, abruptly.

"No, I don't--not at all! I hardly know anyone in Russia. Why, is that
your name?"

"Yes, I am Rogojin, Parfen Rogojin."

"Parfen Rogojin? dear me--then don't you belong to those very Rogojins,
perhaps--" began the clerk, with a very perceptible increase of civility
in his tone.

"Yes--those very ones," interrupted Rogojin, impatiently, and with scant
courtesy. I may remark that he had not once taken any notice of the
blotchy-faced passenger, and had hitherto addressed all his remarks
direct to the prince.

"Dear me--is it possible?" observed the clerk, while his face assumed an
expression of great deference and servility--if not of absolute
alarm: "what, a son of that very Semen Rogojin--hereditary honourable
citizen--who died a month or so ago and left two million and a half of
roubles?"

"And how do _you_ know that he left two million and a half of roubles?"
asked Rogojin, disdainfully, and no deigning so much as to look at the
other. "However, it's true enough that my father died a month ago, and
that here am I returning from Pskoff, a month after, with hardly a boot
to my foot. They've treated me like a dog! I've been ill of fever at
Pskoff the whole time, and not a line, nor farthing of money, have I
received from my mother or my confounded brother!"

"And now you'll have a million roubles, at least--goodness gracious me!"
exclaimed the clerk, rubbing his hands.

"Five weeks since, I was just like yourself," continued Rogojin,
addressing the prince, "with nothing but a bundle and the clothes I
wore. I ran away from my father and came to Pskoff to my aunt's house,
where I caved in at once with fever, and he went and died while I was
away. All honour to my respected father's memory--but he uncommonly
nearly killed me, all the same. Give you my word, prince, if I hadn't
cut and run then, when I did, he'd have murdered me like a dog."

"I suppose you angered him somehow?" asked the prince, looking at the
millionaire with considerable curiosity But though there may have been
something remarkable in the fact that this man was heir to millions of
roubles there was something about him which surprised and interested
the prince more than that. Rogojin, too, seemed to have taken up the
conversation with unusual alacrity it appeared that he was still in a
considerable state of excitement, if not absolutely feverish, and was
in real need of someone to talk to for the mere sake of talking, as
safety-valve to his agitation.

As for his red-nosed neighbour, the latter--since the information as to
the identity of Rogojin--hung over him, seemed to be living on the
honey of his words and in the breath of his nostrils, catching at every
syllable as though it were a pearl of great price.

"Oh, yes; I angered him--I certainly did anger him," replied Rogojin.
"But what puts me out so is my brother. Of course my mother couldn't do
anything--she's too old--and whatever brother Senka says is law for her!
But why couldn't he let me know? He sent a telegram, they say. What's
the good of a telegram? It frightened my aunt so that she sent it back
to the office unopened, and there it's been ever since! It's only thanks
to Konief that I heard at all; he wrote me all about it. He says my
brother cut off the gold tassels from my father's coffin, at night
because they're worth a lot of money!' says he. Why, I can get him
sent off to Siberia for that alone, if I like; it's sacrilege. Here,
you--scarecrow!" he added, addressing the clerk at his side, "is it
sacrilege or not, by law?'

"Sacrilege, certainly--certainly sacrilege," said the latter.

"And it's Siberia for sacrilege, isn't it?"

"Undoubtedly so; Siberia, of course!"

"They will think that I'm still ill," continued Rogojin to the prince,
"but I sloped off quietly, seedy as I was, took the train and came away.
Aha, brother Senka, you'll have to open your gates and let me in, my
boy! I know he told tales about me to my father--I know that well enough
but I certainly did rile my father about Nastasia Philipovna that's very
sure, and that was my own doing."

"Nastasia Philipovna?" said the clerk, as though trying to think out
something.

"Come, you know nothing about _her_," said Rogojin, impatiently.

"And supposing I do know something?" observed the other, triumphantly.

"Bosh! there are plenty of Nastasia Philipovnas. And what an impertinent
beast you are!" he added angrily. "I thought some creature like you
would hang on to me as soon as I got hold of my money."

"Oh, but I do know, as it happens," said the clerk in an aggravating
manner. "Lebedeff knows all about her. You are pleased to reproach me,
your excellency, but what if I prove that I am right after all? Nastasia
Phillpovna's family name is Barashkoff--I know, you see-and she is a
very well known lady, indeed, and comes of a good family, too. She is
connected with one Totski, Afanasy Ivanovitch, a man of considerable
property, a director of companies, and so on, and a great friend of
General Epanchin, who is interested in the same matters as he is."

"My eyes!" said Rogojin, really surprised at last. "The devil take the
fellow, how does he know that?"

"Why, he knows everything--Lebedeff knows everything! I was a month or
two with Lihachof after his father died, your excellency, and while he
was knocking about--he's in the debtor's prison now--I was with him,
and he couldn't do a thing without Lebedeff; and I got to know Nastasia
Philipovna and several people at that time."

"Nastasia Philipovna? Why, you don't mean to say that she and
Lihachof--" cried Rogojin, turning quite pale.

"No, no, no, no, no! Nothing of the sort, I assure you!" said Lebedeff,
hastily. "Oh dear no, not for the world! Totski's the only man with any
chance there. Oh, no! He takes her to his box at the opera at the French
theatre of an evening, and the officers and people all look at her and
say, 'By Jove, there's the famous Nastasia Philipovna!' but no one ever
gets any further than that, for there is nothing more to say."

"Yes, it's quite true," said Rogojin, frowning gloomily; "so Zaleshoff
told me. I was walking about the Nefsky one fine day, prince, in my
father's old coat, when she suddenly came out of a shop and stepped
into her carriage. I swear I was all of a blaze at once. Then I met
Zaleshoff--looking like a hair-dresser's assistant, got up as fine as I
don't know who, while I looked like a tinker. 'Don't flatter yourself,
my boy,' said he; 'she's not for such as you; she's a princess, she
is, and her name is Nastasia Philipovna Barashkoff, and she lives
with Totski, who wishes to get rid of her because he's growing rather
old--fifty-five or so--and wants to marry a certain beauty, the
loveliest woman in all Petersburg.' And then he told me that I could
see Nastasia Philipovna at the opera-house that evening, if I liked, and
described which was her box. Well, I'd like to see my father allowing
any of us to go to the theatre; he'd sooner have killed us, any day.
However, I went for an hour or so and saw Nastasia Philipovna, and I
never slept a wink all night after. Next morning my father happened to
give me two government loan bonds to sell, worth nearly five thousand
roubles each. 'Sell them,' said he, 'and then take seven thousand five
hundred roubles to the office, give them to the cashier, and bring me
back the rest of the ten thousand, without looking in anywhere on the
way; look sharp, I shall be waiting for you.' Well, I sold the bonds,
but I didn't take the seven thousand roubles to the office; I went
straight to the English shop and chose a pair of earrings, with a
diamond the size of a nut in each. They cost four hundred roubles more
than I had, so I gave my name, and they trusted me. With the earrings
I went at once to Zaleshoff's. 'Come on!' I said, 'come on to Nastasia
Philipovna's,' and off we went without more ado. I tell you I hadn't a
notion of what was about me or before me or below my feet all the way;
I saw nothing whatever. We went straight into her drawing-room, and then
she came out to us.

"I didn't say right out who I was, but Zaleshoff said: 'From Parfen
Rogojin, in memory of his first meeting with you yesterday; be so kind
as to accept these!'

"She opened the parcel, looked at the earrings, and laughed.

"'Thank your friend Mr. Rogojin for his kind attention,' says she, and
bowed and went off. Why didn't I die there on the spot? The worst of it
all was, though, that the beast Zaleshoff got all the credit of it! I
was short and abominably dressed, and stood and stared in her face and
never said a word, because I was shy, like an ass! And there was he all
in the fashion, pomaded and dressed out, with a smart tie on, bowing and
scraping; and I bet anything she took him for me all the while!

"'Look here now,' I said, when we came out, 'none of your interference
here after this-do you understand?' He laughed: 'And how are you going
to settle up with your father?' says he. I thought I might as well jump
into the Neva at once without going home first; but it struck me that I
wouldn't, after all, and I went home feeling like one of the damned."

"My goodness!" shivered the clerk. "And his father," he added, for the
prince's instruction, "and his father would have given a man a ticket to
the other world for ten roubles any day--not to speak of ten thousand!"

The prince observed Rogojin with great curiosity; he seemed paler than
ever at this moment.

"What do you know about it?" cried the latter. "Well, my father learned
the whole story at once, and Zaleshoff blabbed it all over the town
besides. So he took me upstairs and locked me up, and swore at me for an
hour. 'This is only a foretaste,' says he; 'wait a bit till night comes,
and I'll come back and talk to you again.'

"Well, what do you think? The old fellow went straight off to Nastasia
Philipovna, touched the floor with his forehead, and began blubbering
and beseeching her on his knees to give him back the diamonds. So after
awhile she brought the box and flew out at him. 'There,' she says,
'take your earrings, you wretched old miser; although they are ten times
dearer than their value to me now that I know what it must have cost
Parfen to get them! Give Parfen my compliments,' she says, 'and thank
him very much!' Well, I meanwhile had borrowed twenty-five roubles from
a friend, and off I went to Pskoff to my aunt's. The old woman there
lectured me so that I left the house and went on a drinking tour round
the public-houses of the place. I was in a high fever when I got to
Pskoff, and by nightfall I was lying delirious in the streets somewhere
or other!"

"Oho! we'll make Nastasia Philipovna sing another song now!" giggled
Lebedeff, rubbing his hands with glee. "Hey, my boy, we'll get her some
proper earrings now! We'll get her such earrings that--"

"Look here," cried Rogojin, seizing him fiercely by the arm, "look here,
if you so much as name Nastasia Philipovna again, I'll tan your hide as
sure as you sit there!"

"Aha! do--by all means! if you tan my hide you won't turn me away from
your society. You'll bind me to you, with your lash, for ever. Ha, ha!
here we are at the station, though."

Sure enough, the train was just steaming in as he spoke.

Though Rogojin had declared that he left Pskoff secretly, a large
collection of friends had assembled to greet him, and did so with
profuse waving of hats and shouting.

"Why, there's Zaleshoff here, too!" he muttered, gazing at the scene
with a sort of triumphant but unpleasant smile. Then he suddenly turned
to the prince: "Prince, I don't know why I have taken a fancy to you;
perhaps because I met you just when I did. But no, it can't be that, for
I met this fellow" (nodding at Lebedeff) "too, and I have not taken a
fancy to him by any means. Come to see me, prince; we'll take off those
gaiters of yours and dress you up in a smart fur coat, the best we
can buy. You shall have a dress coat, best quality, white waistcoat,
anything you like, and your pocket shall be full of money. Come, and
you shall go with me to Nastasia Philipovna's. Now then will you come or
no?"

"Accept, accept, Prince Lef Nicolaievitch" said Lebedef solemnly; "don't
let it slip! Accept, quick!"

Prince Muishkin rose and stretched out his hand courteously, while he
replied with some cordiality:

"I will come with the greatest pleasure, and thank you very much for
taking a fancy to me. I dare say I may even come today if I have time,
for I tell you frankly that I like you very much too. I liked you
especially when you told us about the diamond earrings; but I liked you
before that as well, though you have such a dark-clouded sort of face.
Thanks very much for the offer of clothes and a fur coat; I certainly
shall require both clothes and coat very soon. As for money, I have
hardly a copeck about me at this moment."

"You shall have lots of money; by the evening I shall have plenty; so
come along!"

"That's true enough, he'll have lots before evening!" put in Lebedeff.

"But, look here, are you a great hand with the ladies? Let's know that
first?" asked Rogojin.

"Oh no, oh no!" said the prince; "I couldn't, you know--my illness--I
hardly ever saw a soul."

"H'm! well--here, you fellow-you can come along with me now if you
like!" cried Rogojin to Lebedeff, and so they all left the carriage.

Lebedeff had his desire. He went off with the noisy group of Rogojin's
friends towards the Voznesensky, while the prince's route lay towards
the Litaynaya. It was damp and wet. The prince asked his way of
passers-by, and finding that he was a couple of miles or so from his
destination, he determined to take a droshky.

II.

General Epanchin lived in his own house near the Litaynaya. Besides this
large residence--five-sixths of which was let in flats and lodgings-the
general was owner of another enormous house in the Sadovaya bringing in
even more rent than the first. Besides these houses he had a delightful
little estate just out of town, and some sort of factory in another part
of the city. General Epanchin, as everyone knew, had a good deal to
do with certain government monopolies; he was also a voice, and an
important one, in many rich public companies of various descriptions;
in fact, he enjoyed the reputation of being a well-to-do man of busy
habits, many ties, and affluent means. He had made himself indispensable
in several quarters, amongst others in his department of the government;
and yet it was a known fact that Fedor Ivanovitch Epanchin was a man of
no education whatever, and had absolutely risen from the ranks.

This last fact could, of course, reflect nothing but credit upon the
general; and yet, though unquestionably a sagacious man, he had his own
little weaknesses-very excusable ones,--one of which was a dislike to
any allusion to the above circumstance. He was undoubtedly clever. For
instance, he made a point of never asserting himself when he would
gain more by keeping in the background; and in consequence many exalted
personages valued him principally for his humility and simplicity, and
because "he knew his place." And yet if these good people could only
have had a peep into the mind of this excellent fellow who "knew his
place" so well! The fact is that, in spite of his knowledge of the world
and his really remarkable abilities, he always liked to appear to be
carrying out other people's ideas rather than his own. And also, his
luck seldom failed him, even at cards, for which he had a passion that
he did not attempt to conceal. He played for high stakes, and moved,
altogether, in very varied society.

As to age, General Epanchin was in the very prime of life; that is,
about fifty-five years of age,--the flowering time of existence, when
real enjoyment of life begins. His healthy appearance, good colour,
sound, though discoloured teeth, sturdy figure, preoccupied air during
business hours, and jolly good humour during his game at cards in the
evening, all bore witness to his success in life, and combined to make
existence a bed of roses to his excellency. The general was lord of a
flourishing family, consisting of his wife and three grown-up daughters.
He had married young, while still a lieutenant, his wife being a girl of
about his own age, who possessed neither beauty nor education, and who
brought him no more than fifty souls of landed property, which
little estate served, however, as a nest-egg for far more important
accumulations. The general never regretted his early marriage, or
regarded it as a foolish youthful escapade; and he so respected and
feared his wife that he was very near loving her. Mrs. Epanchin came of
the princely stock of Muishkin, which if not a brilliant, was, at all
events, a decidedly ancient family; and she was extremely proud of her
descent.

With a few exceptions, the worthy couple had lived through their long
union very happily. While still young the wife had been able to make
important friends among the aristocracy, partly by virtue of her family
descent, and partly by her own exertions; while, in after life, thanks
to their wealth and to the position of her husband in the service, she
took her place among the higher circles as by right.

During these last few years all three of the general's
daughters-Alexandra, Adelaida, and Aglaya--had grown up and matured. Of
course they were only Epanchins, but their mother's family was noble;
they might expect considerable fortunes; their father had hopes of
attaining to very high rank indeed in his country's service-all of which
was satisfactory. All three of the girls were decidedly pretty, even
the eldest, Alexandra, who was just twenty-five years old. The middle
daughter was now twenty-three, while the youngest, Aglaya, was twenty.
This youngest girl was absolutely a beauty, and had begun of late to
attract considerable attention in society. But this was not all, for
every one of the three was clever, well educated, and accomplished.

It was a matter of general knowledge that the three girls were very fond
of one another, and supported each other in every way; it was even said
that the two elder ones had made certain sacrifices for the sake of
the idol of the household, Aglaya. In society they not only disliked
asserting themselves, but were actually retiring. Certainly no one could
blame them for being too arrogant or haughty, and yet everybody was well
aware that they were proud and quite understood their own value. The
eldest was musical, while the second was a clever artist, which fact
she had concealed until lately. In a word, the world spoke well of the
girls; but they were not without their enemies, and occasionally people
talked with horror of the number of books they had read.

They were in no hurry to marry. They liked good society, but were not
too keen about it. All this was the more remarkable, because everyone
was well aware of the hopes and aims of their parents.

It was about eleven o'clock in the forenoon when the prince rang the
bell at General Epanchin's door. The general lived on the first floor
or flat of the house, as modest a lodging as his position permitted. A
liveried servant opened the door, and the prince was obliged to enter
into long explanations with this gentleman, who, from the first glance,
looked at him and his bundle with grave suspicion. At last, however, on
the repeated positive assurance that he really was Prince Muishkin, and
must absolutely see the general on business, the bewildered domestic
showed him into a little ante-chamber leading to a waiting-room that
adjoined the general's study, there handing him over to another servant,
whose duty it was to be in this ante-chamber all the morning, and
announce visitors to the general. This second individual wore a dress
coat, and was some forty years of age; he was the general's special
study servant, and well aware of his own importance.

"Wait in the next room, please; and leave your bundle here," said the
door-keeper, as he sat down comfortably in his own easy-chair in the
ante-chamber. He looked at the prince in severe surprise as the latter
settled himself in another chair alongside, with his bundle on his
knees.

"If you don't mind, I would rather sit here with you," said the prince;
"I should prefer it to sitting in there."

"Oh, but you can't stay here. You are a visitor--a guest, so to speak.
Is it the general himself you wish to see?"

The man evidently could not take in the idea of such a shabby-looking
visitor, and had decided to ask once more.

"Yes--I have business--" began the prince.

"I do not ask you what your business may be, all I have to do is to
announce you; and unless the secretary comes in here I cannot do that."

The man's suspicions seemed to increase more and more. The prince was
too unlike the usual run of daily visitors; and although the general
certainly did receive, on business, all sorts and conditions of men, yet
in spite of this fact the servant felt great doubts on the subject
of this particular visitor. The presence of the secretary as an
intermediary was, he judged, essential in this case.

"Surely you--are from abroad?" he inquired at last, in a confused sort
of way. He had begun his sentence intending to say, "Surely you are not
Prince Muishkin, are you?"

"Yes, straight from the train! Did not you intend to say, 'Surely you
are not Prince Muishkin?' just now, but refrained out of politeness?"

"H'm!" grunted the astonished servant.

"I assure you I am not deceiving you; you shall not have to answer for
me. As to my being dressed like this, and carrying a bundle, there's
nothing surprising in that--the fact is, my circumstances are not
particularly rosy at this moment."

"H'm!--no, I'm not afraid of that, you see; I have to announce you,
that's all. The secretary will be out directly-that is, unless you--yes,
that's the rub--unless you--come, you must allow me to ask you--you've
not come to beg, have you?"

"Oh dear no, you can be perfectly easy on that score. I have quite
another matter on hand."

"You must excuse my asking, you know. Your appearance led me to
think--but just wait for the secretary; the general is busy now, but the
secretary is sure to come out."

"Oh--well, look here, if I have some time to wait, would you mind
telling me, is there any place about where I could have a smoke? I have
my pipe and tobacco with me."

"_Smoke_?" said the man, in shocked but disdainful surprise, blinking his
eyes at the prince as though he could not believe his senses. "No, sir,
you cannot smoke here, and I wonder you are not ashamed of the very
suggestion. Ha, ha! a cool idea that, I declare!"

"Oh, I didn't mean in this room! I know I can't smoke here, of course.
I'd adjourn to some other room, wherever you like to show me to. You
see, I'm used to smoking a good deal, and now I haven't had a puff for
three hours; however, just as you like."

"Now how on earth am I to announce a man like that?" muttered the
servant. "In the first place, you've no right in here at all; you ought
to be in the waiting-room, because you're a sort of visitor--a guest, in
fact--and I shall catch it for this. Look here, do you intend to take up
you abode with us?" he added, glancing once more at the prince's bundle,
which evidently gave him no peace.

"No, I don't think so. I don't think I should stay even if they were
to invite me. I've simply come to make their acquaintance, and nothing
more."

"Make their acquaintance?" asked the man, in amazement, and with
redoubled suspicion. "Then why did you say you had business with the
general?"

"Oh well, very little business. There is one little matter--some
advice I am going to ask him for; but my principal object is simply to
introduce myself, because I am Prince Muishkin, and Madame Epanchin is
the last of her branch of the house, and besides herself and me there
are no other Muishkins left."

"What--you're a relation then, are you?" asked the servant, so
bewildered that he began to feel quite alarmed.

"Well, hardly so. If you stretch a point, we are relations, of course,
but so distant that one cannot really take cognizance of it. I once
wrote to your mistress from abroad, but she did not reply. However, I
have thought it right to make acquaintance with her on my arrival. I am
telling you all this in order to ease your mind, for I see you are still
far from comfortable on my account. All you have to do is to announce me
as Prince Muishkin, and the object of my visit will be plain enough. If
I am received--very good; if not, well, very good again. But they are
sure to receive me, I should think; Madame Epanchin will naturally be
curious to see the only remaining representative of her family. She
values her Muishkin descent very highly, if I am rightly informed."

The prince's conversation was artless and confiding to a degree, and
the servant could not help feeling that as from visitor to common
serving-man this state of things was highly improper. His conclusion was
that one of two things must be the explanation--either that this was a
begging impostor, or that the prince, if prince he were, was simply a
fool, without the slightest ambition; for a sensible prince with any
ambition would certainly not wait about in ante-rooms with servants, and
talk of his own private affairs like this. In either case, how was he to
announce this singular visitor?

"I really think I must request you to step into the next room!" he said,
with all the insistence he could muster.

"Why? If I had been sitting there now, I should not have had the
opportunity of making these personal explanations. I see you are still
uneasy about me and keep eyeing my cloak and bundle. Don't you think
you might go in yourself now, without waiting for the secretary to come
out?"

"No, no! I can't announce a visitor like yourself without the secretary.
Besides the general said he was not to be disturbed--he is with the
Colonel C--. Gavrila Ardalionovitch goes in without announcing."

"Who may that be? a clerk?"

"What? Gavrila Ardalionovitch? Oh no; he belongs to one of the
companies. Look here, at all events put your bundle down, here."

"Yes, I will if I may; and--can I take off my cloak"

"Of course; you can't go in _there_ with it on, anyhow."

The prince rose and took off his mantle, revealing a neat enough morning
costume--a little worn, but well made. He wore a steel watch chain and
from this chain there hung a silver Geneva watch. Fool the prince might
be, still, the general's servant felt that it was not correct for him to
continue to converse thus with a visitor, in spite of the fact that the
prince pleased him somehow.

"And what time of day does the lady receive?" the latter asked,
reseating himself in his old place.

"Oh, that's not in my province! I believe she receives at any time; it
depends upon the visitors. The dressmaker goes in at eleven. Gavrila
Ardalionovitch is allowed much earlier than other people, too; he is
even admitted to early lunch now and then."

"It is much warmer in the rooms here than it is abroad at this season,"
observed the prince; "but it is much warmer there out of doors. As for
the houses--a Russian can't live in them in the winter until he gets
accustomed to them."

"Don't they heat them at all?"

"Well, they do heat them a little; but the houses and stoves are so
different to ours."

"H'm! were you long away?"

"Four years! and I was in the same place nearly all the time,--in one
village."

"You must have forgotten Russia, hadn't you?"

"Yes, indeed I had--a good deal; and, would you believe it, I often
wonder at myself for not having forgotten how to speak Russian? Even
now, as I talk to you, I keep saying to myself 'how well I am speaking
it.' Perhaps that is partly why I am so talkative this morning. I assure
you, ever since yesterday evening I have had the strongest desire to go
on and on talking Russian."

"H'm! yes; did you live in Petersburg in former years?"

This good flunkey, in spite of his conscientious scruples, really could
not resist continuing such a very genteel and agreeable conversation.

"In Petersburg? Oh no! hardly at all, and now they say so much is
changed in the place that even those who did know it well are obliged to
relearn what they knew. They talk a good deal about the new law courts,
and changes there, don't they?"

"H'm! yes, that's true enough. Well now, how is the law over there, do
they administer it more justly than here?"

"Oh, I don't know about that! I've heard much that is good about our
legal administration, too. There is no capital punishment here for one
thing."

"Is there over there?"

"Yes--I saw an execution in France--at Lyons. Schneider took me over
with him to see it."

"What, did they hang the fellow?"

"No, they cut off people's heads in France."

"What did the fellow do?--yell?"

"Oh no--it's the work of an instant. They put a man inside a frame and
a sort of broad knife falls by machinery--they call the thing a
guillotine-it falls with fearful force and weight-the head springs
off so quickly that you can't wink your eye in between. But all the
preparations are so dreadful. When they announce the sentence, you know,
and prepare the criminal and tie his hands, and cart him off to the
scaffold--that's the fearful part of the business. The people all crowd
round--even women-though they don't at all approve of women looking on."

"No, it's not a thing for women."

"Of course not--of course not!--bah! The criminal was a fine intelligent
fearless man; Le Gros was his name; and I may tell you--believe it or
not, as you like--that when that man stepped upon the scaffold he _cried_,
he did indeed,--he was as white as a bit of paper. Isn't it a dreadful
idea that he should have cried--cried! Whoever heard of a grown man
crying from fear--not a child, but a man who never had cried before--a
grown man of forty-five years. Imagine what must have been going on in
that man's mind at such a moment; what dreadful convulsions his whole
spirit must have endured; it is an outrage on the soul that's what it
is. Because it is said 'thou shalt not kill,' is he to be killed because
he murdered some one else? No, it is not right, it's an impossible
theory. I assure you, I saw the sight a month ago and it's dancing
before my eyes to this moment. I dream of it, often."

The prince had grown animated as he spoke, and a tinge of colour
suffused his pale face, though his way of talking was as quiet as ever.
The servant followed his words with sympathetic interest. Clearly he
was not at all anxious to bring the conversation to an end. Who knows?
Perhaps he too was a man of imagination and with some capacity for
thought.

"Well, at all events it is a good thing that there's no pain when the
poor fellow's head flies off," he remarked.

"Do you know, though," cried the prince warmly, "you made that remark
now, and everyone says the same thing, and the machine is designed with
the purpose of avoiding pain, this guillotine I mean; but a thought came
into my head then: what if it be a bad plan after all? You may laugh at
my idea, perhaps--but I could not help its occurring to me all the same.
Now with the rack and tortures and so on--you suffer terrible pain of
course; but then your torture is bodily pain only (although no doubt you
have plenty of that) until you die. But _here_ I should imagine the
most terrible part of the whole punishment is, not the bodily pain at
all--but the certain knowledge that in an hour,--then in ten minutes,
then in half a minute, then now--this very _instant_--your soul must
quit your body and that you will no longer be a man--and that this
is certain, _certain_! That's the point--the certainty of it. Just that
instant when you place your head on the block and hear the iron grate
over your head--then--that quarter of a second is the most awful of all.

"This is not my own fantastical opinion--many people have thought the
same; but I feel it so deeply that I'll tell you what I think. I believe
that to execute a man for murder is to punish him immeasurably more
dreadfully than is equivalent to his crime. A murder by sentence is
far more dreadful than a murder committed by a criminal. The man who is
attacked by robbers at night, in a dark wood, or anywhere, undoubtedly
hopes and hopes that he may yet escape until the very moment of his
death. There are plenty of instances of a man running away, or imploring
for mercy--at all events hoping on in some degree--even after his throat
was cut. But in the case of an execution, that last hope--having which
it is so immeasurably less dreadful to die,--is taken away from the
wretch and _certainty_ substituted in its place! There is his sentence,
and with it that terrible certainty that he cannot possibly escape
death--which, I consider, must be the most dreadful anguish in the
world. You may place a soldier before a cannon's mouth in battle, and
fire upon him--and he will still hope. But read to that same soldier his
death-sentence, and he will either go mad or burst into tears. Who dares
to say that any man can suffer this without going mad? No, no! it is
an abuse, a shame, it is unnecessary--why should such a thing exist?
Doubtless there may be men who have been sentenced, who have suffered
this mental anguish for a while and then have been reprieved; perhaps
such men may have been able to relate their feelings afterwards. Our
Lord Christ spoke of this anguish and dread. No! no! no! No man should
be treated so, no man, no man!"

The servant, though of course he could not have expressed all this
as the prince did, still clearly entered into it and was greatly
conciliated, as was evident from the increased amiability of his
expression. "If you are really very anxious for a smoke," he remarked,
"I think it might possibly be managed, if you are very quick about it.
You see they might come out and inquire for you, and you wouldn't be on
the spot. You see that door there? Go in there and you'll find a little
room on the right; you can smoke there, only open the window, because I
ought not to allow it really, and--." But there was no time, after all.

A young fellow entered the ante-room at this moment, with a bundle
of papers in his hand. The footman hastened to help him take off his
overcoat. The new arrival glanced at the prince out of the corners of
his eyes.

"This gentleman declares, Gavrila Ardalionovitch," began the man,
confidentially and almost familiarly, "that he is Prince Muishkin and
a relative of Madame Epanchin's. He has just arrived from abroad, with
nothing but a bundle by way of luggage--."

The prince did not hear the rest, because at this point the servant
continued his communication in a whisper.

Gavrila Ardalionovitch listened attentively, and gazed at the prince
with great curiosity. At last he motioned the man aside and stepped
hurriedly towards the prince.

"Are you Prince Muishkin?" he asked, with the greatest courtesy and
amiability.

He was a remarkably handsome young fellow of some twenty-eight summers,
fair and of middle height; he wore a small beard, and his face was most
intelligent. Yet his smile, in spite of its sweetness, was a little
thin, if I may so call it, and showed his teeth too evenly; his
gaze though decidedly good-humoured and ingenuous, was a trifle too
inquisitive and intent to be altogether agreeable.

"Probably when he is alone he looks quite different, and hardly smiles
at all!" thought the prince.

He explained about himself in a few words, very much the same as he had
told the footman and Rogojin beforehand.

Gavrila Ardalionovitch meanwhile seemed to be trying to recall
something.

"Was it not you, then, who sent a letter a year or less ago--from
Switzerland, I think it was--to Elizabetha Prokofievna (Mrs. Epanchin)?"

"It was."

"Oh, then, of course they will remember who you are. You wish to see
the general? I'll tell him at once--he will be free in a minute; but
you--you had better wait in the ante-chamber,--hadn't you? Why is he
here?" he added, severely, to the man.

"I tell you, sir, he wished it himself!"

At this moment the study door opened, and a military man, with a
portfolio under his arm, came out talking loudly, and after bidding
good-bye to someone inside, took his departure.

"You there, Gania?" cried a voice from the study, "come in here, will
you?"

Gavrila Ardalionovitch nodded to the prince and entered the room
hastily.

A couple of minutes later the door opened again and the affable voice of
Gania cried:

"Come in please, prince!"

III.

General Ivan Fedorovitch Epanchin was standing In the middle of the
room, and gazed with great curiosity at the prince as he entered. He
even advanced a couple of steps to meet him.

The prince came forward and introduced himself.

"Quite so," replied the general, "and what can I do for you?"

"Oh, I have no special business; my principal object was to make your
acquaintance. I should not like to disturb you. I do not know your times
and arrangements here, you see, but I have only just arrived. I came
straight from the station. I am come direct from Switzerland."

The general very nearly smiled, but thought better of it and kept his
smile back. Then he reflected, blinked his eyes, stared at his guest
once more from head to foot; then abruptly motioned him to a chair, sat
down himself, and waited with some impatience for the prince to speak.

Gania stood at his table in the far corner of the room, turning over
papers.

"I have not much time for making acquaintances, as a rule," said the
general, "but as, of course, you have your object in coming, I--"

"I felt sure you would think I had some object in view when I resolved
to pay you this visit," the prince interrupted; "but I give you my word,
beyond the pleasure of making your acquaintance I had no personal object
whatever."

"The pleasure is, of course, mutual; but life is not all pleasure, as
you are aware. There is such a thing as business, and I really do not
see what possible reason there can be, or what we have in common to--"

"Oh, there is no reason, of course, and I suppose there is nothing in
common between us, or very little; for if I am Prince Muishkin, and your
wife happens to be a member of my house, that can hardly be called a
'reason.' I quite understand that. And yet that was my whole motive for
coming. You see I have not been in Russia for four years, and knew very
little about anything when I left. I had been very ill for a long time,
and I feel now the need of a few good friends. In fact, I have a certain
question upon which I much need advice, and do not know whom to go to
for it. I thought of your family when I was passing through Berlin.
'They are almost relations,' I said to myself,' so I'll begin with them;
perhaps we may get on with each other, I with them and they with me, if
they are kind people;' and I have heard that you are very kind people!"

"Oh, thank you, thank you, I'm sure," replied the general, considerably
taken aback. "May I ask where you have taken up your quarters?"

"Nowhere, as yet."

"What, straight from the station to my house? And how about your
luggage?"

"I only had a small bundle, containing linen, with me, nothing more. I
can carry it in my hand, easily. There will be plenty of time to take a
room in some hotel by the evening."

"Oh, then you _do_ intend to take a room?"

"Of course."

"To judge from your words, you came straight to my house with the
intention of staying there."

"That could only have been on your invitation. I confess, however, that
I should not have stayed here even if you had invited me, not for any
particular reason, but because it is--well, contrary to my practice and
nature, somehow."

"Oh, indeed! Then it is perhaps as well that I neither _did_ invite you,
nor _do_ invite you now. Excuse me, prince, but we had better make this
matter clear, once for all. We have just agreed that with regard to our
relationship there is not much to be said, though, of course, it would
have been very delightful to us to feel that such relationship did
actually exist; therefore, perhaps--"

"Therefore, perhaps I had better get up and go away?" said the prince,
laughing merrily as he rose from his place; just as merrily as though
the circumstances were by no means strained or difficult. "And I give
you my word, general, that though I know nothing whatever of manners and
customs of society, and how people live and all that, yet I felt quite
sure that this visit of mine would end exactly as it has ended now.
Oh, well, I suppose it's all right; especially as my letter was not
answered. Well, good-bye, and forgive me for having disturbed you!"

The prince's expression was so good-natured at this moment, and so
entirely free from even a suspicion of unpleasant feeling was the
smile with which he looked at the general as he spoke, that the latter
suddenly paused, and appeared to gaze at his guest from quite a new
point of view, all in an instant.

"Do you know, prince," he said, in quite a different tone, "I do not
know you at all, yet, and after all, Elizabetha Prokofievna would
very likely be pleased to have a peep at a man of her own name. Wait a
little, if you don't mind, and if you have time to spare?"

"Oh, I assure you I've lots of time, my time is entirely my own!" And
the prince immediately replaced his soft, round hat on the table. "I
confess, I thought Elizabetha Prokofievna would very likely remember
that I had written her a letter. Just now your servant--outside
there--was dreadfully suspicious that I had come to beg of you. I
noticed that! Probably he has very strict instructions on that score;
but I assure you I did not come to beg. I came to make some friends.
But I am rather bothered at having disturbed you; that's all I care
about.--"

"Look here, prince," said the general, with a cordial smile, "if you
really are the sort of man you appear to be, it may be a source of great
pleasure to us to make your better acquaintance; but, you see, I am
a very busy man, and have to be perpetually sitting here and signing
papers, or off to see his excellency, or to my department, or somewhere;
so that though I should be glad to see more of people, nice people--you
see, I--however, I am sure you are so well brought up that you will see
at once, and--but how old are you, prince?"

"Twenty-six."

"No? I thought you very much younger."

"Yes, they say I have a 'young' face. As to disturbing you I shall soon
learn to avoid doing that, for I hate disturbing people. Besides, you
and I are so differently constituted, I should think, that there must be
very little in common between us. Not that I will ever believe there is
_nothing_ in common between any two people, as some declare is the case.
I am sure people make a great mistake in sorting each other into groups,
by appearances; but I am boring you, I see, you--"

"Just two words: have you any means at all? Or perhaps you may be
intending to undertake some sort of employment? Excuse my questioning
you, but--"

"Oh, my dear sir, I esteem and understand your kindness in putting the
question. No; at present I have no means whatever, and no employment
either, but I hope to find some. I was living on other people abroad.
Schneider, the professor who treated me and taught me, too, in
Switzerland, gave me just enough money for my journey, so that now I
have but a few copecks left. There certainly is one question upon which
I am anxious to have advice, but--"

"Tell me, how do you intend to live now, and what are your plans?"
interrupted the general.

"I wish to work, somehow or other."

"Oh yes, but then, you see, you are a philosopher. Have you any talents,
or ability in any direction--that is, any that would bring in money and
bread? Excuse me again--"

"Oh, don't apologize. No, I don't think I have either talents or special
abilities of any kind; on the contrary. I have always been an invalid
and unable to learn much. As for bread, I should think--"

The general interrupted once more with questions; while the prince again
replied with the narrative we have heard before. It appeared that the
general had known Pavlicheff; but why the latter had taken an interest
in the prince, that young gentleman could not explain; probably by
virtue of the old friendship with his father, he thought.

The prince had been left an orphan when quite a little child, and
Pavlicheff had entrusted him to an old lady, a relative of his own,
living in the country, the child needing the fresh air and exercise of
country life. He was educated, first by a governess, and afterwards by a
tutor, but could not remember much about this time of his life. His fits
were so frequent then, that they made almost an idiot of him (the prince
used the expression "idiot" himself). Pavlicheff had met Professor
Schneider in Berlin, and the latter had persuaded him to send the boy
to Switzerland, to Schneider's establishment there, for the cure of his
epilepsy, and, five years before this time, the prince was sent off. But
Pavlicheff had died two or three years since, and Schneider had himself
supported the young fellow, from that day to this, at his own expense.
Although he had not quite cured him, he had greatly improved his
condition; and now, at last, at the prince's own desire, and because
of a certain matter which came to the ears of the latter, Schneider had
despatched the young man to Russia.

The general was much astonished.

"Then you have no one, absolutely _no_ one in Russia?" he asked.

"No one, at present; but I hope to make friends; and then I have a
letter from--"

"At all events," put in the general, not listening to the news about the
letter, "at all events, you must have learned _something_, and your
malady would not prevent your undertaking some easy work, in one of the
departments, for instance?

"Oh dear no, oh no! As for a situation, I should much like to find one
for I am anxious to discover what I really am fit for. I have learned
a good deal in the last four years, and, besides, I read a great many
Russian books."

"Russian books, indeed? Then, of course, you can read and write quite
correctly?"

"Oh dear, yes!"

"Capital! And your handwriting?"

"Ah, there I am _really_ talented! I may say I am a real caligraphist. Let
me write you something, just to show you," said the prince, with some
excitement.

"With pleasure! In fact, it is very necessary. I like your readiness,
prince; in fact, I must say--I-I-like you very well, altogether," said
the general.

"What delightful writing materials you have here, such a lot of pencils
and things, and what beautiful paper! It's a charming room altogether.
I know that picture, it's a Swiss view. I'm sure the artist painted it
from nature, and that I have seen the very place--"

"Quite likely, though I bought it here. Gania, give the prince some
paper. Here are pens and paper; now then, take this table. What's
this?" the general continued to Gania, who had that moment taken a large
photograph out of his portfolio, and shown it to his senior. "Halloa!
Nastasia Philipovna! Did she send it you herself? Herself?" he inquired,
with much curiosity and great animation.

"She gave it me just now, when I called in to congratulate her. I asked
her for it long ago. I don't know whether she meant it for a hint that
I had come empty-handed, without a present for her birthday, or what,"
added Gania, with an unpleasant smile.

"Oh, nonsense, nonsense," said the general, with decision. "What
extraordinary ideas you have, Gania! As if she would hint; that's
not her way at all. Besides, what could you give her, without having
thousands at your disposal? You might have given her your portrait,
however. Has she ever asked you for it?"

"No, not yet. Very likely she never will. I suppose you haven't
forgotten about tonight, have you, Ivan Fedorovitch? You were one of
those specially invited, you know."

"Oh no, I remember all right, and I shall go, of course. I should think
so! She's twenty-five years old today! And, you know, Gania, you must
be ready for great things; she has promised both myself and Afanasy
Ivanovitch that she will give a decided answer tonight, yes or no. So be
prepared!"

Gania suddenly became so ill at ease that his face grew paler than ever.

"Are you sure she said that?" he asked, and his voice seemed to quiver
as he spoke.

"Yes, she promised. We both worried her so that she gave in; but she
wished us to tell you nothing about it until the day."

The general watched Gania's confusion intently, and clearly did not like
it.

"Remember, Ivan Fedorovitch," said Gania, in great agitation, "that I
was to be free too, until her decision; and that even then I was to have
my 'yes or no' free."

"Why, don't you, aren't you--" began the general, in alarm.

"Oh, don't misunderstand--"

"But, my dear fellow, what are you doing, what do you mean?"

"Oh, I'm not rejecting her. I may have expressed myself badly, but I
didn't mean that."

"Reject her! I should think not!" said the general with annoyance, and
apparently not in the least anxious to conceal it. "Why, my dear
fellow, it's not a question of your rejecting her, it is whether you are
prepared to receive her consent joyfully, and with proper satisfaction.
How are things going on at home?"

"At home? Oh, I can do as I like there, of course; only my father will
make a fool of himself, as usual. He is rapidly becoming a general
nuisance. I don't ever talk to him now, but I hold him in cheek, safe
enough. I swear if it had not been for my mother, I should have shown
him the way out, long ago. My mother is always crying, of course, and my
sister sulks. I had to tell them at last that I intended to be master of
my own destiny, and that I expect to be obeyed at home. At least, I gave
my sister to understand as much, and my mother was present."

"Well, I must say, I cannot understand it!" said the general, shrugging
his shoulders and dropping his hands. "You remember your mother, Nina
Alexandrovna, that day she came and sat here and groaned-and when I
asked her what was the matter, she says, 'Oh, it's such a DISHONOUR
to us!' dishonour! Stuff and nonsense! I should like to know who can
reproach Nastasia Philipovna, or who can say a word of any kind against
her. Did she mean because Nastasia had been living with Totski? What
nonsense it is! You would not let her come near your daughters, says
Nina Alexandrovna. What next, I wonder? I don't see how she can fail
to--to understand--"

"Her own position?" prompted Gania. "She does understand. Don't be
annoyed with her. I have warned her not to meddle in other people's
affairs. However, although there's comparative peace at home at present,
the storm will break if anything is finally settled tonight."

The prince heard the whole of the foregoing conversation, as he sat at
the table, writing. He finished at last, and brought the result of his
labour to the general's desk.

"So this is Nastasia Philipovna," he said, looking attentively and
curiously at the portrait. "How wonderfully beautiful!" he immediately
added, with warmth. The picture was certainly that of an unusually
lovely woman. She was photographed in a black silk dress of simple
design, her hair was evidently dark and plainly arranged, her eyes were
deep and thoughtful, the expression of her face passionate, but proud.
She was rather thin, perhaps, and a little pale. Both Gania and the
general gazed at the prince in amazement.

"How do you know it's Nastasia Philipovna?" asked the general; "you
surely don't know her already, do you?"

"Yes, I do! I have only been one day in Russia, but I have heard of
the great beauty!" And the prince proceeded to narrate his meeting with
Rogojin in the train and the whole of the latter's story.

"There's news!" said the general in some excitement, after listening to
the story with engrossed attention.

"Oh, of course it's nothing but humbug!" cried Gania, a little
disturbed, however. "It's all humbug; the young merchant was pleased
to indulge in a little innocent recreation! I have heard something of
Rogojin!"

"Yes, so have I!" replied the general. "Nastasia Philipovna told us
all about the earrings that very day. But now it is quite a different
matter. You see the fellow really has a million of roubles, and he is
passionately in love. The whole story smells of passion, and we all
know what this class of gentry is capable of when infatuated. I am much
afraid of some disagreeable scandal, I am indeed!"

"You are afraid of the million, I suppose," said Gania, grinning and
showing his teeth.

"And you are NOT, I presume, eh?"

"How did he strike you, prince?" asked Gania, suddenly. "Did he seem to
be a serious sort of a man, or just a common rowdy fellow? What was your
own opinion about the matter?"

While Gania put this question, a new idea suddenly flashed into his
brain, and blazed out, impatiently, in his eyes. The general, who was
really agitated and disturbed, looked at the prince too, but did not
seem to expect much from his reply.

"I really don't quite know how to tell you," replied the prince, "but
it certainly did seem to me that the man was full of passion, and not,
perhaps, quite healthy passion. He seemed to be still far from well.
Very likely he will be in bed again in a day or two, especially if he
lives fast."

"No! do you think so?" said the general, catching at the idea.

"Yes, I do think so!"

"Yes, but the sort of scandal I referred to may happen at any moment. It
may be this very evening," remarked Gania to the general, with a smile.

"Of course; quite so. In that case it all depends upon what is going on
in her brain at this moment."

"You know the kind of person she is at times."

"How? What kind of person is she?" cried the general, arrived at the
limits of his patience. "Look here, Gania, don't you go annoying her
tonight What you are to do is to be as agreeable towards her as ever you
can. Well, what are you smiling at? You must understand, Gania, that
I have no interest whatever in speaking like this. Whichever way the
question is settled, it will be to my advantage. Nothing will move
Totski from his resolution, so I run no risk. If there is anything I
desire, you must know that it is your benefit only. Can't you trust me?
You are a sensible fellow, and I have been counting on you; for, in this
matter, that, that--"

"Yes, that's the chief thing," said Gania, helping the general out of
his difficulties again, and curling his lips in an envenomed smile,
which he did not attempt to conceal. He gazed with his fevered eyes
straight into those of the general, as though he were anxious that the
latter might read his thoughts.

The general grew purple with anger.

"Yes, of course it is the chief thing!" he cried, looking sharply at
Gania. "What a very curious man you are, Gania! You actually seem to
be GLAD to hear of this millionaire fellow's arrival--just as though you
wished for an excuse to get out of the whole thing. This is an affair in
which you ought to act honestly with both sides, and give due warning,
to avoid compromising others. But, even now, there is still time. Do
you understand me? I wish to know whether you desire this arrangement or
whether you do not? If not, say so,--and-and welcome! No one is trying
to force you into the snare, Gavrila Ardalionovitch, if you see a snare
in the matter, at least."

"I do desire it," murmured Gania, softly but firmly, lowering his eyes;
and he relapsed into gloomy silence.

The general was satisfied. He had excited himself, and was evidently
now regretting that he had gone so far. He turned to the prince, and
suddenly the disagreeable thought of the latter's presence struck
him, and the certainty that he must have heard every word of the
conversation. But he felt at ease in another moment; it only needed one
glance at the prince to see that in that quarter there was nothing to
fear.

"Oh!" cried the general, catching sight of the prince's specimen of
caligraphy, which the latter had now handed him for inspection. "Why,
this is simply beautiful; look at that, Gania, there's real talent
there!"

On a sheet of thick writing-paper the prince had written in medieval
characters the legend:

"The gentle Abbot Pafnute signed this."

"There," explained the prince, with great delight and animation, "there,
that's the abbot's real signature--from a manuscript of the fourteenth
century. All these old abbots and bishops used to write most
beautifully, with such taste and so much care and diligence. Have you no
copy of Pogodin, general? If you had one I could show you another type.
Stop a bit--here you have the large round writing common in France
during the eighteenth century. Some of the letters are shaped quite
differently from those now in use. It was the writing current then, and
employed by public writers generally. I copied this from one of them,
and you can see how good it is. Look at the well-rounded a and d. I
have tried to translate the French character into the Russian letters--a
difficult thing to do, but I think I have succeeded fairly. Here is a
fine sentence, written in a good, original hand--'Zeal triumphs over
all.' That is the script of the Russian War Office. That is how official
documents addressed to important personages should be written. The
letters are round, the type black, and the style somewhat remarkable. A
stylist would not allow these ornaments, or attempts at flourishes--just
look at these unfinished tails!--but it has distinction and really
depicts the soul of the writer. He would like to give play to his
imagination, and follow the inspiration of his genius, but a soldier is
only at ease in the guard-room, and the pen stops half-way, a slave
to discipline. How delightful! The first time I met an example of this
handwriting, I was positively astonished, and where do you think I
chanced to find it? In Switzerland, of all places! Now that is an
ordinary English hand. It can hardly be improved, it is so refined and
exquisite--almost perfection. This is an example of another kind,
a mixture of styles. The copy was given me by a French commercial
traveller. It is founded on the English, but the downstrokes are a
little blacker, and more marked. Notice that the oval has some slight
modification--it is more rounded. This writing allows for flourishes;
now a flourish is a dangerous thing! Its use requires such taste, but,
if successful, what a distinction it gives to the whole! It results in
an incomparable type--one to fall in love with!"

"Dear me! How you have gone into all the refinements and details of the
question! Why, my dear fellow, you are not a caligraphist, you are an
artist! Eh, Gania?"

"Wonderful!" said Gania. "And he knows it too," he added, with a
sarcastic smile.

"You may smile,--but there's a career in this," said the general. "You
don't know what a great personage I shall show this to, prince. Why, you
can command a situation at thirty-five roubles per month to start with.
However, it's half-past twelve," he concluded, looking at his watch; "so
to business, prince, for I must be setting to work and shall not see you
again today. Sit down a minute. I have told you that I cannot receive
you myself very often, but I should like to be of some assistance to
you, some small assistance, of a kind that would give you satisfaction.
I shall find you a place in one of the State departments, an easy
place--but you will require to be accurate. Now, as to your plans--in
the house, or rather in the family of Gania here--my young friend, whom
I hope you will know better--his mother and sister have prepared two
or three rooms for lodgers, and let them to highly recommended young
fellows, with board and attendance. I am sure Nina Alexandrovna will
take you in on my recommendation. There you will be comfortable and well
taken care of; for I do not think, prince, that you are the sort of
man to be left to the mercy of Fate in a town like Petersburg. Nina
Alexandrovna, Gania's mother, and Varvara Alexandrovna, are ladies for
whom I have the highest possible esteem and respect. Nina Alexandrovna
is the wife of General Ardalion Alexandrovitch, my old brother in arms,
with whom, I regret to say, on account of certain circumstances, I am no
longer acquainted. I give you all this information, prince, in order
to make it clear to you that I am personally recommending you to this
family, and that in so doing, I am more or less taking upon myself to
answer for you. The terms are most reasonable, and I trust that your
salary will very shortly prove amply sufficient for your expenditure. Of
course pocket-money is a necessity, if only a little; do not be angry,
prince, if I strongly recommend you to avoid carrying money in your
pocket. But as your purse is quite empty at the present moment, you must
allow me to press these twenty-five roubles upon your acceptance, as
something to begin with. Of course we will settle this little matter
another time, and if you are the upright, honest man you look, I
anticipate very little trouble between us on that score. Taking so much
interest in you as you may perceive I do, I am not without my object,
and you shall know it in good time. You see, I am perfectly candid with
you. I hope, Gania, you have nothing to say against the prince's taking
up his abode in your house?"

"Oh, on the contrary! my mother will be very glad," said Gania,
courteously and kindly.

"I think only one of your rooms is engaged as yet, is it not? That
fellow Ferd-Ferd--"

"Ferdishenko."

"Yes--I don't like that Ferdishenko. I can't understand why Nastasia
Philipovna encourages him so. Is he really her cousin, as he says?"

"Oh dear no, it's all a joke. No more cousin than I am."

"Well, what do you think of the arrangement, prince?"

"Thank you, general; you have behaved very kindly to me; all the more
so since I did not ask you to help me. I don't say that out of pride. I
certainly did not know where to lay my head tonight. Rogojin asked me to
come to his house, of course, but--"

"Rogojin? No, no, my good fellow. I should strongly recommend you,
paternally,--or, if you prefer it, as a friend,--to forget all about
Rogojin, and, in fact, to stick to the family into which you are about
to enter."

"Thank you," began the prince; "and since you are so very kind there is
just one matter which I--"

"You must really excuse me," interrupted the general, "but I positively
haven't another moment now. I shall just tell Elizabetha Prokofievna
about you, and if she wishes to receive you at once--as I shall advise
her--I strongly recommend you to ingratiate yourself with her at the
first opportunity, for my wife may be of the greatest service to you in
many ways. If she cannot receive you now, you must be content to wait
till another time. Meanwhile you, Gania, just look over these accounts,
will you? We mustn't forget to finish off that matter--"

The general left the room, and the prince never succeeded in broaching
the business which he had on hand, though he had endeavoured to do so
four times.

Gania lit a cigarette and offered one to the prince. The latter accepted
the offer, but did not talk, being unwilling to disturb Gania's work.
He commenced to examine the study and its contents. But Gania hardly
so much as glanced at the papers lying before him; he was absent and
thoughtful, and his smile and general appearance struck the prince still
more disagreeably now that the two were left alone together.

Suddenly Gania approached our hero who was at the moment standing over
Nastasia Philipovna's portrait, gazing at it.

"Do you admire that sort of woman, prince?" he asked, looking intently
at him. He seemed to have some special object in the question.

"It's a wonderful face," said the prince, "and I feel sure that her
destiny is not by any means an ordinary, uneventful one. Her face is
smiling enough, but she must have suffered terribly--hasn't she? Her
eyes show it--those two bones there, the little points under her eyes,
just where the cheek begins. It's a proud face too, terribly proud! And
I--I can't say whether she is good and kind, or not. Oh, if she be but
good! That would make all well!"

"And would you marry a woman like that, now?" continued Gania, never
taking his excited eyes off the prince's face.

"I cannot marry at all," said the latter. "I am an invalid."

"Would Rogojin marry her, do you think?"

"Why not? Certainly he would, I should think. He would marry her
tomorrow!--marry her tomorrow and murder her in a week!"

Hardly had the prince uttered the last word when Gania gave such a
fearful shudder that the prince almost cried out.

"What's the matter?" said he, seizing Gania's hand.

"Your highness! His excellency begs your presence in her excellency's
apartments!" announced the footman, appearing at the door.

The prince immediately followed the man out of the room.

IV.

ALL three of the Miss Epanchins were fine, healthy girls, well-grown,
with good shoulders and busts, and strong--almost masculine--hands;
and, of course, with all the above attributes, they enjoyed capital
appetites, of which they were not in the least ashamed.

Elizabetha Prokofievna sometimes informed the girls that they were
a little too candid in this matter, but in spite of their outward
deference to their mother these three young women, in solemn conclave,
had long agreed to modify the unquestioning obedience which they had
been in the habit of according to her; and Mrs. General Epanchin had
judged it better to say nothing about it, though, of course, she was
well aware of the fact.

It is true that her nature sometimes rebelled against these dictates
of reason, and that she grew yearly more capricious and impatient; but
having a respectful and well-disciplined husband under her thumb at
all times, she found it possible, as a rule, to empty any little
accumulations of spleen upon his head, and therefore the harmony of the
family was kept duly balanced, and things went as smoothly as family
matters can.

Mrs. Epanchin had a fair appetite herself, and generally took her share
of the capital mid-day lunch which was always served for the girls, and
which was nearly as good as a dinner. The young ladies used to have a
cup of coffee each before this meal, at ten o'clock, while still in bed.
This was a favourite and unalterable arrangement with them. At half-past
twelve, the table was laid in the small dining-room, and occasionally
the general himself appeared at the family gathering, if he had time.

Besides tea and coffee, cheese, honey, butter, pan-cakes of various
kinds (the lady of the house loved these best), cutlets, and so on,
there was generally strong beef soup, and other substantial delicacies.

On the particular morning on which our story has opened, the family had
assembled in the dining-room, and were waiting the general's appearance,
the latter having promised to come this day. If he had been one moment
late, he would have been sent for at once; but he turned up punctually.

As he came forward to wish his wife good-morning and kiss her hands, as
his custom was, he observed something in her look which boded ill. He
thought he knew the reason, and had expected it, but still, he was not
altogether comfortable. His daughters advanced to kiss him, too, and
though they did not look exactly angry, there was something strange in
their expression as well.

The general was, owing to certain circumstances, a little inclined to be
too suspicious at home, and needlessly nervous; but, as an experienced
father and husband, he judged it better to take measures at once to
protect himself from any dangers there might be in the air.

However, I hope I shall not interfere with the proper sequence of my
narrative too much, if I diverge for a moment at this point, in order
to explain the mutual relations between General Epanchin's family and
others acting a part in this history, at the time when we take up the
thread of their destiny. I have already stated that the general, though
he was a man of lowly origin, and of poor education, was, for all that,
an experienced and talented husband and father. Among other things,
he considered it undesirable to hurry his daughters to the matrimonial
altar and to worry them too much with assurances of his paternal wishes
for their happiness, as is the custom among parents of many grown-up
daughters. He even succeeded in ranging his wife on his side on this
question, though he found the feat very difficult to accomplish, because
unnatural; but the general's arguments were conclusive, and founded upon
obvious facts. The general considered that the girls' taste and good
sense should be allowed to develop and mature deliberately, and that the
parents' duty should merely be to keep watch, in order that no strange
or undesirable choice be made; but that the selection once effected,
both father and mother were bound from that moment to enter heart and
soul into the cause, and to see that the matter progressed without
hindrance until the altar should be happily reached.

Besides this, it was clear that the Epanchins' position gained each
year, with geometrical accuracy, both as to financial solidity and
social weight; and, therefore, the longer the girls waited, the better
was their chance of making a brilliant match.

But again, amidst the incontrovertible facts just recorded, one more,
equally significant, rose up to confront the family; and this was,
that the eldest daughter, Alexandra, had imperceptibly arrived at her
twenty-fifth birthday. Almost at the same moment, Afanasy Ivanovitch
Totski, a man of immense wealth, high connections, and good standing,
announced his intention of marrying. Afanasy Ivanovitch was a gentleman
of fifty-five years of age, artistically gifted, and of most refined
tastes. He wished to marry well, and, moreover, he was a keen admirer
and judge of beauty.

Now, since Totski had, of late, been upon terms of great cordiality with
Epanchin, which excellent relations were intensified by the fact that
they were, so to speak, partners in several financial enterprises, it
so happened that the former now put in a friendly request to the general
for counsel with regard to the important step he meditated. Might he
suggest, for instance, such a thing as a marriage between himself and
one of the general's daughters?

Evidently the quiet, pleasant current of the family life of the
Epanchins was about to undergo a change.

The undoubted beauty of the family, par excellence, was the youngest,
Aglaya, as aforesaid. But Totski himself, though an egotist of the
extremest type, realized that he had no chance there; Aglaya was clearly
not for such as he.

Perhaps the sisterly love and friendship of the three girls had more or
less exaggerated Aglaya's chances of happiness. In their opinion, the
latter's destiny was not merely to be very happy; she was to live in
a heaven on earth. Aglaya's husband was to be a compendium of all the
virtues, and of all success, not to speak of fabulous wealth. The two
elder sisters had agreed that all was to be sacrificed by them, if need
be, for Aglaya's sake; her dowry was to be colossal and unprecedented.

The general and his wife were aware of this agreement, and, therefore,
when Totski suggested himself for one of the sisters, the parents made
no doubt that one of the two elder girls would probably accept the
offer, since Totski would certainly make no difficulty as to dowry. The
general valued the proposal very highly. He knew life, and realized what
such an offer was worth.

The answer of the sisters to the communication was, if not conclusive,
at least consoling and hopeful. It made known that the eldest,
Alexandra, would very likely be disposed to listen to a proposal.

Alexandra was a good-natured girl, though she had a will of her own. She
was intelligent and kind-hearted, and, if she were to marry Totski, she
would make him a good wife. She did not care for a brilliant marriage;
she was eminently a woman calculated to soothe and sweeten the life of
any man; decidedly pretty, if not absolutely handsome. What better could
Totski wish?

So the matter crept slowly forward. The general and Totski had agreed to
avoid any hasty and irrevocable step. Alexandra's parents had not even
begun to talk to their daughters freely upon the subject, when suddenly,
as it were, a dissonant chord was struck amid the harmony of the
proceedings. Mrs. Epanchin began to show signs of discontent, and
that was a serious matter. A certain circumstance had crept in, a
disagreeable and troublesome factor, which threatened to overturn the
whole business.

This circumstance had come into existence eighteen years before. Close
to an estate of Totski's, in one of the central provinces of Russia,
there lived, at that time, a poor gentleman whose estate was of the
wretchedest description. This gentleman was noted in the district for
his persistent ill-fortune; his name was Barashkoff, and, as regards
family and descent, he was vastly superior to Totski, but his estate was
mortgaged to the last acre. One day, when he had ridden over to the town
to see a creditor, the chief peasant of his village followed him shortly
after, with the news that his house had been burnt down, and that his
wife had perished with it, but his children were safe.

Even Barashkoff, inured to the storms of evil fortune as he was, could
not stand this last stroke. He went mad and died shortly after in the
town hospital. His estate was sold for the creditors; and the little
girls--two of them, of seven and eight years of age respectively,--were
adopted by Totski, who undertook their maintenance and education in the
kindness of his heart. They were brought up together with the children
of his German bailiff. Very soon, however, there was only one of
them left-Nastasia Philipovna--for the other little one died of
whooping-cough. Totski, who was living abroad at this time, very soon
forgot all about the child; but five years after, returning to Russia,
it struck him that he would like to look over his estate and see how
matters were going there, and, arrived at his bailiff's house, he was
not long in discovering that among the children of the latter there now
dwelt a most lovely little girl of twelve, sweet and intelligent, and
bright, and promising to develop beauty of most unusual quality-as to
which last Totski was an undoubted authority.

He only stayed at his country scat a few days on this occasion, but
he had time to make his arrangements. Great changes took place in
the child's education; a good governess was engaged, a Swiss lady of
experience and culture. For four years this lady resided in the house
with little Nastia, and then the education was considered complete.
