our Liberals never allow other people to have an opinion of their own,
and immediately answer their opponents with abuse, if they do not have
recourse to arguments of a still more unpleasant nature."

"What you say is quite true," observed General Epanchin; then, clasping
his hands behind his back, he returned to his place on the terrace
steps, where he yawned with an air of boredom.

"Come, sir, that will do; you weary me," said Lizabetha Prokofievna
suddenly to Evgenie Pavlovitch.

Hippolyte rose all at once, looking troubled and almost frightened.

"It is time for me to go," he said, glancing round in perplexity. "I
have detained you... I wanted to tell you everything... I thought you
all... for the last time... it was a whim..."

He evidently had sudden fits of returning animation, when he awoke
from his semi-delirium; then, recovering full self-possession for a
few moments, he would speak, in disconnected phrases which had perhaps
haunted him for a long while on his bed of suffering, during weary,
sleepless nights.

"Well, good-bye," he said abruptly. "You think it is easy for me to say
good-bye to you? Ha, ha!"

Feeling that his question was somewhat gauche, he smiled angrily. Then
as if vexed that he could not ever express what he really meant, he said
irritably, in a loud voice:

"Excellency, I have the honour of inviting you to my funeral; that is,
if you will deign to honour it with your presence. I invite you all,
gentlemen, as well as the general."

He burst out laughing again, but it was the laughter of a madman.
Lizabetha Prokofievna approached him anxiously and seized his arm.
He stared at her for a moment, still laughing, but soon his face grew
serious.

"Do you know that I came here to see those trees?" pointing to the
trees in the park. "It is not ridiculous, is it? Say that it is not
ridiculous!" he demanded urgently of Lizabetha Prokofievna. Then he
seemed to be plunged in thought. A moment later he raised his head, and
his eyes sought for someone. He was looking for Evgenie Pavlovitch, who
was close by on his right as before, but he had forgotten this, and
his eyes ranged over the assembled company. "Ah! you have not gone!" he
said, when he caught sight of him at last. "You kept on laughing just
now, because I thought of speaking to the people from the window for a
quarter of an hour. But I am not eighteen, you know; lying on that bed,
and looking out of that window, I have thought of all sorts of things
for such a long time that... a dead man has no age, you know. I was
saying that to myself only last week, when I was awake in the night. Do
you know what you fear most? You fear our sincerity more than anything,
although you despise us! The idea crossed my mind that night... You
thought I was making fun of you just now, Lizabetha Prokofievna? No, the
idea of mockery was far from me; I only meant to praise you. Colia
told me the prince called you a child--very well--but let me see, I had
something else to say..." He covered his face with his hands and tried
to collect his thoughts.

"Ah, yes--you were going away just now, and I thought to myself: 'I
shall never see these people again-never again! This is the last time
I shall see the trees, too. I shall see nothing after this but the red
brick wall of Meyer's house opposite my window. Tell them about it--try
to tell them,' I thought. 'Here is a beautiful young girl--you are a
dead man; make them understand that. Tell them that a dead man may
say anything--and Mrs. Grundy will not be angry--ha-ha! You are not
laughing?" He looked anxiously around. "But you know I get so many queer
ideas, lying there in bed. I have grown convinced that nature is full of
mockery--you called me an atheist just now, but you know this nature...
why are you laughing again? You are very cruel!" he added suddenly,
regarding them all with mournful reproach. "I have not corrupted Colia,"
he concluded in a different and very serious tone, as if remembering
something again.

"Nobody here is laughing at you. Calm yourself," said Lizabetha
Prokofievna, much moved. "You shall see a new doctor tomorrow; the
other was mistaken; but sit down, do not stand like that! You are
delirious--" Oh, what shall we do with him she cried in anguish, as she
made him sit down again in the arm-chair.

A tear glistened on her cheek. At the sight of it Hippolyte seemed
amazed. He lifted his hand timidly and, touched the tear with his
finger, smiling like a child.

"I... you," he began joyfully. "You cannot tell how I... he always spoke
so enthusiastically of you, Colia here; I liked his enthusiasm. I was
not corrupting him! But I must leave him, too--I wanted to leave
them all--there was not one of them--not one! I wanted to be a man of
action--I had a right to be. Oh! what a lot of things I wanted! Now I
want nothing; I renounce all my wants; I swore to myself that I would
want nothing; let them seek the truth without me! Yes, nature is full
of mockery! Why"--he continued with sudden warmth--"does she create
the choicest beings only to mock at them? The only human being who is
recognized as perfect, when nature showed him to mankind, was given the
mission to say things which have caused the shedding of so much blood
that it would have drowned mankind if it had all been shed at once! Oh!
it is better for me to die! I should tell some dreadful lie too; nature
would so contrive it! I have corrupted nobody. I wanted to live for the
happiness of all men, to find and spread the truth. I used to look out
of my window at the wall of Meyer's house, and say to myself that if I
could speak for a quarter of an hour I would convince the whole world,
and now for once in my life I have come into contact with... you--if
not with the others! And what is the result? Nothing! The sole result
is that you despise me! Therefore I must be a fool, I am useless, it is
time I disappeared! And I shall leave not even a memory! Not a sound,
not a trace, not a single deed! I have not spread a single truth!... Do
not laugh at the fool! Forget him! Forget him forever! I beseech you,
do not be so cruel as to remember! Do you know that if I were not
consumptive, I would kill myself?"

Though he seemed to wish to say much more, he became silent. He fell
back into his chair, and, covering his face with his hands, began to sob
like a little child.

"Oh! what on earth are we to do with him?" cried Lizabetha Prokofievna.
She hastened to him and pressed his head against her bosom, while he
sobbed convulsively.

"Come, come, come! There, you must not cry, that will do. You are a good
child! God will forgive you, because you knew no better. Come now, be a
man! You know presently you will be ashamed."

Hippolyte raised his head with an effort, saying:

"I have little brothers and sisters, over there, poor avid innocent. She
will corrupt them! You are a saint! You are a child yourself--save them!
Snatch them from that... she is... it is shameful! Oh! help them! God
will repay you a hundredfold. For the love of God, for the love of
Christ!"

"Speak, Ivan Fedorovitch! What are we to do?" cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna, irritably. "Please break your majestic silence! I tell you,
if you cannot come to some decision, I will stay here all night myself.
You have tyrannized over me enough, you autocrat!"

She spoke angrily, and in great excitement, and expected an immediate
reply. But in such a case, no matter how many are present, all prefer
to keep silence: no one will take the initiative, but all reserve their
comments till afterwards. There were some present--Varvara Ardalionovna,
for instance--who would have willingly sat there till morning without
saying a word. Varvara had sat apart all the evening without opening her
lips, but she listened to everything with the closest attention; perhaps
she had her reasons for so doing.

"My dear," said the general, "it seems to me that a sick-nurse would be
of more use here than an excitable person like you. Perhaps it would be
as well to get some sober, reliable man for the night. In any case we
must consult the prince, and leave the patient to rest at once. Tomorrow
we can see what can be done for him."

"It is nearly midnight; we are going. Will he come with us, or is he to
stay here?" Doktorenko asked crossly of the prince.

"You can stay with him if you like," said Muishkin.

"There is plenty of room here."

Suddenly, to the astonishment of all, Keller went quickly up to the
general.

"Excellency," he said, impulsively, "if you want a reliable man for the
night, I am ready to sacrifice myself for my friend--such a soul as he
has! I have long thought him a great man, excellency! My article showed
my lack of education, but when he criticizes he scatters pearls!"

Ivan Fedorovitch turned from the boxer with a gesture of despair.

"I shall be delighted if he will stay; it would certainly be difficult
for him to get back to Petersburg," said the prince, in answer to the
eager questions of Lizabetha Prokofievna.

"But you are half asleep, are you not? If you don't want him, I will
take him back to my house! Why, good gracious! He can hardly stand up
himself! What is it? Are you ill?"

Not finding the prince on his death-bed, Lizabetha Prokofievna had been
misled by his appearance to think him much better than he was. But his
recent illness, the painful memories attached to it, the fatigue of this
evening, the incident with "Pavlicheff's son," and now this scene with
Hippolyte, had all so worked on his oversensitive nature that he was now
almost in a fever. Moreover, anew trouble, almost a fear, showed itself
in his eyes; he watched Hippolyte anxiously as if expecting something
further.

Suddenly Hippolyte arose. His face, shockingly pale, was that of a man
overwhelmed with shame and despair. This was shown chiefly in the look
of fear and hatred which he cast upon the assembled company, and in the
wild smile upon his trembling lips. Then he cast down his eyes, and with
the same smile, staggered towards Burdovsky and Doktorenko, who stood at
the entrance to the verandah. He had decided to go with them.

"There! that is what I feared!" cried the prince. "It was inevitable!"

Hippolyte turned upon him, a prey to maniacal rage, which set all the
muscles of his face quivering.

"Ah! that is what you feared! It was inevitable, you say! Well, let me
tell you that if I hate anyone here--I hate you all," he cried, in a
hoarse, strained voice--"but you, you, with your jesuitical soul, your
soul of sickly sweetness, idiot, beneficent millionaire--I hate you
worse than anything or anyone on earth! I saw through you and hated you
long ago; from the day I first heard of you. I hated you with my whole
heart. You have contrived all this! You have driven me into this state!
You have made a dying man disgrace himself. You, you, you are the cause
of my abject cowardice! I would kill you if I remained alive! I do not
want your benefits; I will accept none from anyone; do you hear? Not
from any one! I want nothing! I was delirious, do not dare to triumph! I
curse every one of you, once for all!"

Breath failed him here, and he was obliged to stop.

"He is ashamed of his tears!" whispered Lebedeff to Lizabetha
Prokofievna. "It was inevitable. Ah! what a wonderful man the prince is!
He read his very soul."

But Mrs. Epanchin would not deign to look at Lebedeff. Drawn up
haughtily, with her head held high, she gazed at the "riff-raff,"
with scornful curiosity. When Hippolyte had finished, Ivan Fedorovitch
shrugged his shoulders, and his wife looked him angrily up and down, as
if to demand the meaning of his movement. Then she turned to the prince.

"Thanks, prince, many thanks, eccentric friend of the family, for the
pleasant evening you have provided for us. I am sure you are quite
pleased that you have managed to mix us up with your extraordinary
affairs. It is quite enough, dear family friend; thank you for giving us
an opportunity of getting to know you so well."

She arranged her cloak with hands that trembled with anger as she waited
for the "riff-raff" to go. The cab which Lebedeff's son had gone to
fetch a quarter of an hour ago, by Doktorenko's order, arrived at that
moment. The general thought fit to put in a word after his wife.

"Really, prince, I hardly expected after--after all our friendly
intercourse--and you see, Lizabetha Prokofievna--"

"Papa, how can you?" cried Adelaida, walking quickly up to the prince
and holding out her hand.

He smiled absently at her; then suddenly he felt a burning sensation in
his ear as an angry voice whispered:

"If you do not turn those dreadful people out of the house this very
instant, I shall hate you all my life--all my life!" It was Aglaya. She
seemed almost in a frenzy, but she turned away before the prince could
look at her. However, there was no one left to turn out of the house,
for they had managed meanwhile to get Hippolyte into the cab, and it had
driven off.

"Well, how much longer is this going to last, Ivan Fedorovitch? What do
you think? Shall I soon be delivered from these odious youths?"

"My dear, I am quite ready; naturally... the prince."

Ivan Fedorovitch held out his hand to Muishkin, but ran after his wife,
who was leaving with every sign of violent indignation, before he had
time to shake it. Adelaida, her fiance, and Alexandra, said good-bye to
their host with sincere friendliness. Evgenie Pavlovitch did the same,
and he alone seemed in good spirits.

"What I expected has happened! But I am sorry, you poor fellow, that
you should have had to suffer for it," he murmured, with a most charming
smile.

Aglaya left without saying good-bye. But the evening was not to end
without a last adventure. An unexpected meeting was yet in store for
Lizabetha Prokofievna.

She had scarcely descended the terrace steps leading to the high road
that skirts the park at Pavlofsk, when suddenly there dashed by a smart
open carriage, drawn by a pair of beautiful white horses. Having passed
some ten yards beyond the house, the carriage suddenly drew up, and one
of the two ladies seated in it turned sharp round as though she had just
caught sight of some acquaintance whom she particularly wished to see.

"Evgenie Pavlovitch! Is that you?" cried a clear, sweet voice, which
caused the prince, and perhaps someone else, to tremble. "Well, I AM
glad I've found you at last! I've sent to town for you twice today
myself! My messengers have been searching for you everywhere!"

Evgenie Pavlovitch stood on the steps like one struck by lightning.
Mrs. Epanchin stood still too, but not with the petrified expression of
Evgenie. She gazed haughtily at the audacious person who had addressed
her companion, and then turned a look of astonishment upon Evgenie
himself.

"There's news!" continued the clear voice. "You need not be anxious
about Kupferof's IOU's--Rogojin has bought them up. I persuaded him
to!--I dare say we shall settle Biscup too, so it's all right, you
see! Au revoir, tomorrow! And don't worry!" The carriage moved on, and
disappeared.

"The woman's mad!" cried Evgenie, at last, crimson with anger, and
looking confusedly around. "I don't know what she's talking about! What
IOU's? Who is she?" Mrs. Epanchin continued to watch his face for a
couple of seconds; then she marched briskly and haughtily away towards
her own house, the rest following her.

A minute afterwards, Evgenie Pavlovitch reappeared on the terrace, in
great agitation.

"Prince," he said, "tell me the truth; do you know what all this means?"

"I know nothing whatever about it!" replied the latter, who was,
himself, in a state of nervous excitement.

"No?"

"No?

"Well, nor do I!" said Evgenie Pavlovitch, laughing suddenly. "I haven't
the slightest knowledge of any such IOU's as she mentioned, I swear I
haven't--What's the matter, are you fainting?"

"Oh, no-no-I'm all right, I assure you!"

XI.

THE anger of the Epanchin family was unappeased for three days. As usual
the prince reproached himself, and had expected punishment, but he was
inwardly convinced that Lizabetha Prokofievna could not be seriously
angry with him, and that she probably was more angry with herself. He
was painfully surprised, therefore, when three days passed with no word
from her. Other things also troubled and perplexed him, and one of these
grew more important in his eyes as the days went by. He had begun to
blame himself for two opposite tendencies--on the one hand to extreme,
almost "senseless," confidence in his fellows, on the other to a "vile,
gloomy suspiciousness."

By the end of the third day the incident of the eccentric lady and
Evgenie Pavlovitch had attained enormous and mysterious proportions in
his mind. He sorrowfully asked himself whether he had been the cause of
this new "monstrosity," or was it... but he refrained from saying who
else might be in fault. As for the letters N.P.B., he looked on that as
a harmless joke, a mere childish piece of mischief--so childish that
he felt it would be shameful, almost dishonourable, to attach any
importance to it.

The day after these scandalous events, however, the prince had the
honour of receiving a visit from Adelaida and her fiance, Prince S. They
came, ostensibly, to inquire after his health. They had wandered out for
a walk, and called in "by accident," and talked for almost the whole
of the time they were with him about a certain most lovely tree in the
park, which Adelaida had set her heart upon for a picture. This, and a
little amiable conversation on Prince S.'s part, occupied the time, and
not a word was said about last evening's episodes. At length Adelaida
burst out laughing, apologized, and explained that they had come
incognito; from which, and from the circumstance that they said nothing
about the prince's either walking back with them or coming to see them
later on, the latter inferred that he was in Mrs. Epanchin's black
books. Adelaida mentioned a watercolour that she would much like to show
him, and explained that she would either send it by Colia, or bring it
herself the next day--which to the prince seemed very suggestive.

At length, however, just as the visitors were on the point of departing,
Prince S. seemed suddenly to recollect himself. "Oh yes, by-the-by," he
said, "do you happen to know, my dear Lef Nicolaievitch, who that lady
was who called out to Evgenie Pavlovitch last night, from the carriage?"

"It was Nastasia Philipovna," said the prince; "didn't you know that? I
cannot tell you who her companion was."

"But what on earth did she mean? I assure you it is a real riddle
to me--to me, and to others, too!" Prince S. seemed to be under the
influence of sincere astonishment.

"She spoke of some bills of Evgenie Pavlovitch's," said the prince,
simply, "which Rogojin had bought up from someone; and implied that
Rogojin would not press him."

"Oh, I heard that much, my dear fellow! But the thing is so impossibly
absurd! A man of property like Evgenie to give IOU's to a money-lender,
and to be worried about them! It is ridiculous. Besides, he cannot
possibly be on such intimate terms with Nastasia Philipovna as she gave
us to understand; that's the principal part of the mystery! He has given
me his word that he knows nothing whatever about the matter, and of
course I believe him. Well, the question is, my dear prince, do you know
anything about it? Has any sort of suspicion of the meaning of it come
across you?"

"No, I know nothing whatever about it. I assure you I had nothing at all
to do with it."

"Oh, prince, how strange you have become! I assure you, I hardly know
you for your old self. How can you suppose that I ever suggested you
could have had a finger in such a business? But you are not quite
yourself today, I can see." He embraced the prince, and kissed him.

"What do you mean, though," asked Muishkin, "'by such a business'? I
don't see any particular 'business' about it at all!"

"Oh, undoubtedly, this person wished somehow, and for some reason, to
do Evgenie Pavlovitch a bad turn, by attributing to him--before
witnesses--qualities which he neither has nor can have," replied Prince
S. drily enough.

Muiskhin looked disturbed, but continued to gaze intently and
questioningly into Prince S.'s face. The latter, however, remained
silent.

"Then it was not simply a matter of bills?" Muishkin said at last, with
some impatience. "It was not as she said?"

"But I ask you, my dear sir, how can there be anything in common between
Evgenie Pavlovitch, and--her, and again Rogojin? I tell you he is a man
of immense wealth--as I know for a fact; and he has further expectations
from his uncle. Simply Nastasia Philipovna--"

Prince S. paused, as though unwilling to continue talking about Nastasia
Philipovna.

"Then at all events he knows her!" remarked the prince, after a moment's
silence.

"Oh, that may be. He may have known her some time ago--two or three
years, at least. He used to know Totski. But it is impossible that
there should be any intimacy between them. She has not even been in the
place--many people don't even know that she has returned from Moscow! I
have only observed her carriage about for the last three days or so."

"It's a lovely carriage," said Adelaida.

"Yes, it was a beautiful turn-out, certainly!"

The visitors left the house, however, on no less friendly terms than
before. But the visit was of the greatest importance to the prince, from
his own point of view. Admitting that he had his suspicions, from
the moment of the occurrence of last night, perhaps even before, that
Nastasia had some mysterious end in view, yet this visit confirmed his
suspicions and justified his fears. It was all clear to him; Prince S.
was wrong, perhaps, in his view of the matter, but he was somewhere near
the truth, and was right in so far as that he understood there to be
an intrigue of some sort going on. Perhaps Prince S. saw it all more
clearly than he had allowed his hearers to understand. At all events,
nothing could be plainer than that he and Adelaida had come for the
express purpose of obtaining explanations, and that they suspected him
of being concerned in the affair. And if all this were so, then SHE must
have some terrible object in view! What was it? There was no stopping
HER, as Muishkin knew from experience, in the performance of anything
she had set her mind on! "Oh, she is mad, mad!" thought the poor prince.

But there were many other puzzling occurrences that day, which required
immediate explanation, and the prince felt very sad. A visit from Vera
Lebedeff distracted him a little. She brought the infant Lubotchka with
her as usual, and talked cheerfully for some time. Then came her younger
sister, and later the brother, who attended a school close by. He
informed Muishkin that his father had lately found a new interpretation
of the star called "wormwood," which fell upon the water-springs, as
described in the Apocalypse. He had decided that it meant the network of
railroads spread over the face of Europe at the present time. The
prince refused to believe that Lebedeff could have given such an
interpretation, and they decided to ask him about it at the earliest
opportunity. Vera related how Keller had taken up his abode with them on
the previous evening. She thought he would remain for some time, as he
was greatly pleased with the society of General Ivolgin and of the
whole family. But he declared that he had only come to them in order
to complete his education! The prince always enjoyed the company of
Lebedeff's children, and today it was especially welcome, for Colia did
not appear all day. Early that morning he had started for Petersburg.
Lebedeff also was away on business. But Gavrila Ardalionovitch had
promised to visit Muishkin, who eagerly awaited his coming.

About seven in the evening, soon after dinner, he arrived. At the first
glance it struck the prince that he, at any rate, must know all the
details of last night's affair. Indeed, it would have been impossible
for him to remain in ignorance considering the intimate relationship
between him, Varvara Ardalionovna, and Ptitsin. But although he and the
prince were intimate, in a sense, and although the latter had placed
the Burdovsky affair in his hands-and this was not the only mark of
confidence he had received--it seemed curious how many matters there
were that were tacitly avoided in their conversations. Muishkin thought
that Gania at times appeared to desire more cordiality and frankness.
It was apparent now, when he entered, that he, was convinced that the
moment for breaking the ice between them had come at last.

But all the same Gania was in haste, for his sister was waiting at
Lebedeff's to consult him on an urgent matter of business. If he had
anticipated impatient questions, or impulsive confidences, he was
soon undeceived. The prince was thoughtful, reserved, even a little
absent-minded, and asked none of the questions--one in particular--that
Gania had expected. So he imitated the prince's demeanour, and talked
fast and brilliantly upon all subjects but the one on which their
thoughts were engaged. Among other things Gania told his host that
Nastasia Philipovna had been only four days in Pavlofsk, and that
everyone was talking about her already. She was staying with Daria
Alexeyevna, in an ugly little house in Mattrossky Street, but drove
about in the smartest carriage in the place. A crowd of followers
had pursued her from the first, young and old. Some escorted her on
horse-back when she took the air in her carriage.

She was as capricious as ever in the choice of her acquaintances, and
admitted few into her narrow circle. Yet she already had a numerous
following and many champions on whom she could depend in time of need.
One gentleman on his holiday had broken off his engagement on her
account, and an old general had quarrelled with his only son for the
same reason.

She was accompanied sometimes in her carriage by a girl of sixteen,
a distant relative of her hostess. This young lady sang very well; in
fact, her music had given a kind of notoriety to their little house.
Nastasia, however, was behaving with great discretion on the whole. She
dressed quietly, though with such taste as to drive all the ladies
in Pavlofsk mad with envy, of that, as well as of her beauty and her
carriage and horses.

"As for yesterday's episode," continued Gania, "of course it was
pre-arranged." Here he paused, as though expecting to be asked how
he knew that. But the prince did not inquire. Concerning Evgenie
Pavlovitch, Gania stated, without being asked, that he believed the
former had not known Nastasia Philipovna in past years, but that he had
probably been introduced to her by somebody in the park during these
four days. As to the question of the IOU's she had spoken of, there
might easily be something in that; for though Evgenie was undoubtedly
a man of wealth, yet certain of his affairs were equally undoubtedly in
disorder. Arrived at this interesting point, Gania suddenly broke off,
and said no more about Nastasia's prank of the previous evening.

At last Varvara Ardalionovna came in search of her brother, and remained
for a few minutes. Without Muishkin's asking her, she informed him that
Evgenie Pavlovitch was spending the day in Petersburg, and perhaps would
remain there over tomorrow; and that her husband had also gone to town,
probably in connection with Evgenie Pavlovitch's affairs.

"Lizabetha Prokofievna is in a really fiendish temper today," she
added, as she went out, "but the most curious thing is that Aglaya has
quarrelled with her whole family; not only with her father and mother,
but with her sisters also. It is not a good sign." She said all this
quite casually, though it was extremely important in the eyes of
the prince, and went off with her brother. Regarding the episode of
"Pavlicheff's son," Gania had been absolutely silent, partly from a kind
of false modesty, partly, perhaps, to "spare the prince's feelings." The
latter, however, thanked him again for the trouble he had taken in the
affair.

Muishkin was glad enough to be left alone. He went out of the garden,
crossed the road, and entered the park. He wished to reflect, and to
make up his mind as to a certain "step." This step was one of those
things, however, which are not thought out, as a rule, but decided for
or against hastily, and without much reflection. The fact is, he felt a
longing to leave all this and go away--go anywhere, if only it were
far enough, and at once, without bidding farewell to anyone. He felt a
presentiment that if he remained but a few days more in this place, and
among these people, he would be fixed there irrevocably and permanently.
However, in a very few minutes he decided that to run away was
impossible; that it would be cowardly; that great problems lay before
him, and that he had no right to leave them unsolved, or at least to
refuse to give all his energy and strength to the attempt to solve them.
Having come to this determination, he turned and went home, his walk
having lasted less than a quarter of an hour. At that moment he was
thoroughly unhappy.

Lebedeff had not returned, so towards evening Keller managed to
penetrate into the prince's apartments. He was not drunk, but in a
confidential and talkative mood. He announced that he had come to tell
the story of his life to Muishkin, and had only remained at Pavlofsk for
that purpose. There was no means of turning him out; nothing short of an
earthquake would have removed him.

In the manner of one with long hours before him, he began his history;
but after a few incoherent words he jumped to the conclusion, which
was that "having ceased to believe in God Almighty, he had lost every
vestige of morality, and had gone so far as to commit a theft." "Could
you imagine such a thing?" said he.

"Listen to me, Keller," returned the prince. "If I were in your place, I
should not acknowledge that unless it were absolutely necessary for some
reason. But perhaps you are making yourself out to be worse than you
are, purposely?"

"I should tell it to no one but yourself, prince, and I only name it now
as a help to my soul's evolution. When I die, that secret will die with
me! But, excellency, if you knew, if you only had the least idea, how
difficult it is to get money nowadays! Where to find it is the question.
Ask for a loan, the answer is always the same: 'Give us gold, jewels, or
diamonds, and it will be quite easy.' Exactly what one has not got! Can
you picture that to yourself? I got angry at last, and said, 'I
suppose you would accept emeralds?' 'Certainly, we accept emeralds with
pleasure. Yes!' 'Well, that's all right,' said I. 'Go to the devil, you
den of thieves!' And with that I seized my hat, and walked out."

"Had you any emeralds?" asked the prince.

"What? I have emeralds? Oh, prince! with what simplicity, with what
almost pastoral simplicity, you look upon life!"

Could not something be made of this man under good influences? asked the
prince of himself, for he began to feel a kind of pity for his visitor.
He thought little of the value of his own personal influence, not from
a sense of humility, but from his peculiar way of looking at things
in general. Imperceptibly the conversation grew more animated and more
interesting, so that neither of the two felt anxious to bring it to a
close. Keller confessed, with apparent sincerity, to having been guilty
of many acts of such a nature that it astonished the prince that he
could mention them, even to him. At every fresh avowal he professed the
deepest repentance, and described himself as being "bathed in tears";
but this did not prevent him from putting on a boastful air at times,
and some of his stories were so absurdly comical that both he and the
prince laughed like madmen.

"One point in your favour is that you seem to have a child-like mind,
and extreme truthfulness," said the prince at last. "Do you know that
that atones for much?"

"I am assuredly noble-minded, and chivalrous to a degree!" said Keller,
much softened. "But, do you know, this nobility of mind exists in a
dream, if one may put it so? It never appears in practice or deed. Now,
why is that? I can never understand."

"Do not despair. I think we may say without fear of deceiving ourselves,
that you have now given a fairly exact account of your life. I, at
least, think it would be impossible to add much to what you have just
told me."

"Impossible?" cried Keller, almost pityingly. "Oh prince, how little you
really seem to understand human nature!"

"Is there really much more to be added?" asked the prince, with mild
surprise. "Well, what is it you really want of me? Speak out; tell me
why you came to make your confession to me?"

"What did I want? Well, to begin with, it is good to meet a man like
you. It is a pleasure to talk over my faults with you. I know you for
one of the best of men... and then... then..."

He hesitated, and appeared so much embarrassed that the prince helped
him out.

"Then you wanted me to lend you money?"

The words were spoken in a grave tone, and even somewhat shyly.

Keller started, gave an astonished look at the speaker, and thumped the
table with his fist.

"Well, prince, that's enough to knock me down! It astounds me! Here you
are, as simple and innocent as a knight of the golden age, and yet...
yet... you read a man's soul like a psychologist! Now, do explain it to
me, prince, because I... I really do not understand!... Of course, my
aim was to borrow money all along, and you... you asked the question
as if there was nothing blameable in it--as if you thought it quite
natural."

"Yes... from you it is quite natural."

"And you are not offended?"

"Why should I be offended?"

"Well, just listen, prince. I remained here last evening, partly because
I have a great admiration for the French archbishop Bourdaloue. I
enjoyed a discussion over him till three o'clock in the morning, with
Lebedeff; and then... then--I swear by all I hold sacred that I am
telling you the truth--then I wished to develop my soul in this frank
and heartfelt confession to you. This was my thought as I was sobbing
myself to sleep at dawn. Just as I was losing consciousness, tears in
my soul, tears on my face (I remember how I lay there sobbing), an idea
from hell struck me. 'Why not, after confessing, borrow money from him?'
You see, this confession was a kind of masterstroke; I intended to use
it as a means to your good grace and favour--and then--then I meant to
walk off with a hundred and fifty roubles. Now, do you not call that
base?"

"It is hardly an exact statement of the case," said the prince in reply.
"You have confused your motives and ideas, as I need scarcely say too
often happens to myself. I can assure you, Keller, I reproach myself
bitterly for it sometimes. When you were talking just now I seemed to be
listening to something about myself. At times I have imagined that all
men were the same," he continued earnestly, for he appeared to be much
interested in the conversation, "and that consoled me in a certain
degree, for a DOUBLE motive is a thing most difficult to fight against.
I have tried, and I know. God knows whence they arise, these ideas that
you speak of as base. I fear these double motives more than ever just
now, but I am not your judge, and in my opinion it is going too far to
give the name of baseness to it--what do you think? You were going
to employ your tears as a ruse in order to borrow money, but you also
say--in fact, you have sworn to the fact--that independently of this
your confession was made with an honourable motive. As for the money,
you want it for drink, do you not? After your confession, that is
weakness, of course; but, after all, how can anyone give up a bad habit
at a moment's notice? It is impossible. What can we do? It is best, I
think, to leave the matter to your own conscience. How does it seem to
you?" As he concluded the prince looked curiously at Keller; evidently
this problem of double motives had often been considered by him before.

"Well, how anybody can call you an idiot after that, is more than I can
understand!" cried the boxer.

The prince reddened slightly.

"Bourdaloue, the archbishop, would not have spared a man like me,"
Keller continued, "but you, you have judged me with humanity. To show
how grateful I am, and as a punishment, I will not accept a hundred and
fifty roubles. Give me twenty-five--that will be enough; it is all I
really need, for a fortnight at least. I will not ask you for more for
a fortnight. I should like to have given Agatha a present, but she does
not really deserve it. Oh, my dear prince, God bless you!"

At this moment Lebedeff appeared, having just arrived from Petersburg.
He frowned when he saw the twenty-five rouble note in Keller's hand, but
the latter, having got the money, went away at once. Lebedeff began to
abuse him.

"You are unjust; I found him sincerely repentant," observed the prince,
after listening for a time.

"What is the good of repentance like that? It is the same exactly as
mine yesterday, when I said, 'I am base, I am base,'--words, and nothing
more!"

"Then they were only words on your part? I thought, on the contrary..."

"Well, I don't mind telling you the truth--you only! Because you see
through a man somehow. Words and actions, truth and falsehood, are all
jumbled up together in me, and yet I am perfectly sincere. I feel the
deepest repentance, believe it or not, as you choose; but words and lies
come out in the infernal craving to get the better of other people.
It is always there--the notion of cheating people, and of using my
repentant tears to my own advantage! I assure you this is the truth,
prince! I would not tell any other man for the world! He would laugh and
jeer at me--but you, you judge a man humanely."

"Why, Keller said the same thing to me nearly word for word a few
minutes ago!" cried Muishkin. "And you both seem inclined to boast about
it! You astonish me, but I think he is more sincere than you, for you
make a regular trade of it. Oh, don't put on that pathetic expression,
and don't put your hand on your heart! Have you anything to say to me?
You have not come for nothing..."

Lebedeff grinned and wriggled.

"I have been waiting all day for you, because I want to ask you a
question; and, for once in your life, please tell me the truth at once.
Had you anything to do with that affair of the carriage yesterday?"

Lebedeff began to grin again, rubbed his hands, sneezed, but spoke not a
word in reply.

"I see you had something to do with it."

"Indirectly, quite indirectly! I am speaking the truth--I am indeed!
I merely told a certain person that I had people in my house, and that
such and such personages might be found among them."

"I am aware that you sent your son to that house--he told me so himself
just now, but what is this intrigue?" said the prince, impatiently.

"It is not my intrigue!" cried Lebedeff, waving his hand.

"It was engineered by other people, and is, properly speaking, rather a
fantasy than an intrigue!"

"But what is it all about? Tell me, for Heaven's sake! Cannot you
understand how nearly it touches me? Why are they blackening Evgenie
Pavlovitch's reputation?"

Lebedeff grimaced and wriggled again.

"Prince!" said he. "Excellency! You won't let me tell you the whole
truth; I have tried to explain; more than once I have begun, but you
have not allowed me to go on..."

The prince gave no answer, and sat deep in thought. Evidently he was
struggling to decide.

"Very well! Tell me the truth," he said, dejectedly.

"Aglaya Ivanovna..." began Lebedeff, promptly.

"Be silent! At once!" interrupted the prince, red with indignation, and
perhaps with shame, too. "It is impossible and absurd! All that has been
invented by you, or fools like you! Let me never hear you say a word
again on that subject!"

Late in the evening Colia came in with a whole budget of Petersburg and
Pavlofsk news. He did not dwell much on the Petersburg part of it, which
consisted chiefly of intelligence about his friend Hippolyte, but passed
quickly to the Pavlofsk tidings. He had gone straight to the Epanchins'
from the station.

"There's the deuce and all going on there!" he said. "First of all about
the row last night, and I think there must be something new as well,
though I didn't like to ask. Not a word about YOU, prince, the whole
time! The most interesting fact was that Aglaya had been quarrelling
with her people about Gania. Colia did not know any details, except that
it had been a terrible quarrel! Also Evgenie Pavlovitch had called, and
met with an excellent reception all round. And another curious thing:
Mrs. Epanchin was so angry that she called Varia to her--Varia was
talking to the girls--and turned her out of the house 'once for all' she
said. I heard it from Varia herself--Mrs. Epanchin was quite polite,
but firm; and when Varia said good-bye to the girls, she told them
nothing about it, and they didn't know they were saying goodbye for the
last time. I'm sorry for Varia, and for Gania too; he isn't half a bad
fellow, in spite of his faults, and I shall never forgive myself for not
liking him before! I don't know whether I ought to continue to go to the
Epanchins' now," concluded Colia--"I like to be quite independent of
others, and of other people's quarrels if I can; but I must think over
it."

"I don't think you need break your heart over Gania," said the prince;
"for if what you say is true, he must be considered dangerous in the
Epanchin household, and if so, certain hopes of his must have been
encouraged."

"What? What hopes?" cried Colia; "you surely don't mean Aglaya?--oh,
no!--"

"You're a dreadful sceptic, prince," he continued, after a moment's
silence. "I have observed of late that you have grown sceptical about
everything. You don't seem to believe in people as you did, and are
always attributing motives and so on--am I using the word 'sceptic' in
its proper sense?"

"I believe so; but I'm not sure."

"Well, I'll change it, right or wrong; I'll say that you are not
sceptical, but JEALOUS. There! you are deadly jealous of Gania, over
a certain proud damsel! Come!" Colia jumped up, with these words, and
burst out laughing. He laughed as he had perhaps never laughed before,
and still more when he saw the prince flushing up to his temples. He was
delighted that the prince should be jealous about Aglaya. However, he
stopped immediately on seeing that the other was really hurt, and the
conversation continued, very earnestly, for an hour or more.

Next day the prince had to go to town, on business. Returning in the
afternoon, he happened upon General Epanchin at the station. The latter
seized his hand, glancing around nervously, as if he were afraid
of being caught in wrong-doing, and dragged him into a first-class
compartment. He was burning to speak about something of importance.

"In the first place, my dear prince, don't be angry with me. I would
have come to see you yesterday, but I didn't know how Lizabetha
Prokofievna would take it. My dear fellow, my house is simply a hell
just now, a sort of sphinx has taken up its abode there. We live in an
atmosphere of riddles; I can't make head or tail of anything. As for
you, I feel sure you are the least to blame of any of us, though you
certainly have been the cause of a good deal of trouble. You see, it's
all very pleasant to be a philanthropist; but it can be carried too far.
Of course I admire kind-heartedness, and I esteem my wife, but--"

The general wandered on in this disconnected way for a long time; it
was clear that he was much disturbed by some circumstance which he could
make nothing of.

"It is plain to me, that YOU are not in it at all," he continued, at
last, a little less vaguely, "but perhaps you had better not come to
our house for a little while. I ask you in the friendliest manner,
mind; just till the wind changes again. As for Evgenie Pavlovitch," he
continued with some excitement, "the whole thing is a calumny, a dirty
calumny. It is simply a plot, an intrigue, to upset our plans and to
stir up a quarrel. You see, prince, I'll tell you privately, Evgenie and
ourselves have not said a word yet, we have no formal understanding, we
are in no way bound on either side, but the word may be said very soon,
don't you see, VERY soon, and all this is most injurious, and is meant
to be so. Why? I'm sure I can't tell you. She's an extraordinary woman,
you see, an eccentric woman; I tell you I am so frightened of that woman
that I can't sleep. What a carriage that was, and where did it come
from, eh? I declare, I was base enough to suspect Evgenie at first; but
it seems certain that that cannot be the case, and if so, why is she
interfering here? That's the riddle, what does she want? Is it to keep
Evgenie to herself? But, my dear fellow, I swear to you, I swear he
doesn't even KNOW her, and as for those bills, why, the whole thing is
an invention! And the familiarity of the woman! It's quite clear we must
treat the impudent creature's attempt with disdain, and redouble our
courtesy towards Evgenie. I told my wife so.

"Now I'll tell you my secret conviction. I'm certain that she's doing
this to revenge herself on me, on account of the past, though I assure
you that all the time I was blameless. I blush at the very idea. And
now she turns up again like this, when I thought she had finally
disappeared! Where's Rogojin all this time? I thought she was Mrs.
Rogojin, long ago."

The old man was in a state of great mental perturbation. The whole of
the journey, which occupied nearly an hour, he continued in this strain,
putting questions and answering them himself, shrugging his shoulders,
pressing the prince's hand, and assuring the latter that, at all
events, he had no suspicion whatever of HIM. This last assurance was
satisfactory, at all events. The general finished by informing him that
Evgenie's uncle was head of one of the civil service departments, and
rich, very rich, and a gourmand. "And, well, Heaven preserve him, of
course--but Evgenie gets his money, don't you see? But, for all this,
I'm uncomfortable, I don't know why. There's something in the air, I
feel there's something nasty in the air, like a bat, and I'm by no means
comfortable."

And it was not until the third day that the formal reconciliation
between the prince and the Epanchins took place, as said before.

XII.

IT was seven in the evening, and the prince was just preparing to go
out for a walk in the park, when suddenly Mrs. Epanchin appeared on the
terrace.

"In the first place, don't dare to suppose," she began, "that I am going
to apologize. Nonsense! You were entirely to blame."

The prince remained silent.

"Were you to blame, or not?"

"No, certainly not, no more than yourself, though at first I thought I
was."

"Oh, very well, let's sit down, at all events, for I don't intend to
stand up all day. And remember, if you say, one word about 'mischievous
urchins,' I shall go away and break with you altogether. Now then, did
you, or did you not, send a letter to Aglaya, a couple of months or so
ago, about Easter-tide?"

"Yes!"

"What for? What was your object? Show me the letter." Mrs. Epanchin's
eyes flashed; she was almost trembling with impatience.

"I have not got the letter," said the prince, timidly, extremely
surprised at the turn the conversation had taken. "If anyone has it, if
it still exists, Aglaya Ivanovna must have it."

"No finessing, please. What did you write about?"

"I am not finessing, and I am not in the least afraid of telling you;
but I don't see the slightest reason why I should not have written."

"Be quiet, you can talk afterwards! What was the letter about? Why are
you blushing?"

The prince was silent. At last he spoke.

"I don't understand your thoughts, Lizabetha Prokofievna; but I can see
that the fact of my having written is for some reason repugnant to you.
You must admit that I have a perfect right to refuse to answer your
questions; but, in order to show you that I am neither ashamed of
the letter, nor sorry that I wrote it, and that I am not in the least
inclined to blush about it" (here the prince's blushes redoubled), "I
will repeat the substance of my letter, for I think I know it almost by
heart."

So saying, the prince repeated the letter almost word for word, as he
had written it.

"My goodness, what utter twaddle, and what may all this nonsense have
signified, pray? If it had any meaning at all!" said Mrs. Epanchin,
cuttingly, after having listened with great attention.

"I really don't absolutely know myself; I know my feeling was very
sincere. I had moments at that time full of life and hope."

"What sort of hope?"

"It is difficult to explain, but certainly not the hopes you have in
your mind. Hopes--well, in a word, hopes for the future, and a feeling
of joy that THERE, at all events, I was not entirely a stranger and a
foreigner. I felt an ecstasy in being in my native land once more; and
one sunny morning I took up a pen and wrote her that letter, but why to
HER, I don't quite know. Sometimes one longs to have a friend near, and
I evidently felt the need of one then," added the prince, and paused.

"Are you in love with her?"

"N-no! I wrote to her as to a sister; I signed myself her brother."

"Oh yes, of course, on purpose! I quite understand."

"It is very painful to me to answer these questions, Lizabetha
Prokofievna."

"I dare say it is; but that's no affair of mine. Now then, assure me
truly as before Heaven, are you lying to me or not?"

"No, I am not lying."

"Are you telling the truth when you say you are not in love?"

"I believe it is the absolute truth."

"'I believe,' indeed! Did that mischievous urchin give it to her?"

"I asked Nicolai Ardalionovitch..."

"The urchin! the urchin!" interrupted Lizabetha Prokofievna in an angry
voice. "I do not want to know if it were Nicolai Ardalionovitch! The
urchin!"

"Nicolai Ardalionovitch..."

"The urchin, I tell you!"

"No, it was not the urchin: it was Nicolai Ardalionovitch," said the
prince very firmly, but without raising his voice.

"Well, all right! All right, my dear! I shall put that down to your
account."

She was silent a moment to get breath, and to recover her composure.

"Well!--and what's the meaning of the 'poor knight,' eh?"

"I don't know in the least; I wasn't present when the joke was made. It
IS a joke. I suppose, and that's all."

"Well, that's a comfort, at all events. You don't suppose she could take
any interest in you, do you? Why, she called you an 'idiot' herself."

"I think you might have spared me that," murmured the prince
reproachfully, almost in a whisper.

"Don't be angry; she is a wilful, mad, spoilt girl. If she likes a
person she will pitch into him, and chaff him. I used to be just such
another. But for all that you needn't flatter yourself, my boy; she is
not for you. I don't believe it, and it is not to be. I tell you so at
once, so that you may take proper precautions. Now, I want to hear you
swear that you are not married to that woman?"

"Lizabetha Prokofievna, what are you thinking of?" cried the prince,
almost leaping to his feet in amazement.

"Why? You very nearly were, anyhow."

"Yes--I nearly was," whispered the prince, hanging his head.

"Well then, have you come here for HER? Are you in love with HER? With
THAT creature?"

"I did not come to marry at all," replied the prince.

"Is there anything you hold sacred?"

"There is."

"Then swear by it that you did not come here to marry HER!"

"I'll swear it by whatever you please."

"I believe you. You may kiss me; I breathe freely at last. But you must
know, my dear friend, Aglaya does not love you, and she shall never be
your wife while I am out of my grave. So be warned in time. Do you hear
me?"

"Yes, I hear."

The prince flushed up so much that he could not look her in the face.

"I have waited for you with the greatest impatience (not that you were
worth it). Every night I have drenched my pillow with tears, not for
you, my friend, not for you, don't flatter yourself! I have my own
grief, always the same, always the same. But I'll tell you why I have
been awaiting you so impatiently, because I believe that Providence
itself sent you to be a friend and a brother to me. I haven't a friend
in the world except Princess Bielokonski, and she is growing as stupid
as a sheep from old age. Now then, tell me, yes or no? Do you know why
she called out from her carriage the other night?"

"I give you my word of honour that I had nothing to do with the matter
and know nothing about it."

"Very well, I believe you. I have my own ideas about it. Up to yesterday
morning I thought it was really Evgenie Pavlovitch who was to blame; now
I cannot help agreeing with the others. But why he was made such a fool
of I cannot understand. However, he is not going to marry Aglaya, I can
tell you that. He may be a very excellent fellow, but--so it shall be.
I was not at all sure of accepting him before, but now I have quite made
up my mind that I won't have him. 'Put me in my coffin first and then
into my grave, and then you may marry my daughter to whomsoever you
please,' so I said to the general this very morning. You see how I trust
you, my boy."

"Yes, I see and understand."

Mrs. Epanchin gazed keenly into the prince's eyes. She was anxious to
see what impression the news as to Evgenie Pavlovitch had made upon him.

"Do you know anything about Gavrila Ardalionovitch?" she asked at last.

"Oh yes, I know a good deal."

"Did you know he had communications with Aglaya?"

"No, I didn't," said the prince, trembling a little, and in great
agitation. "You say Gavrila Ardalionovitch has private communications
with Aglaya?--Impossible!"

"Only quite lately. His sister has been working like a rat to clear the
way for him all the winter."

"I don't believe it!" said the prince abruptly, after a short pause.
"Had it been so I should have known long ago."

"Oh, of course, yes; he would have come and wept out his secret on your
bosom. Oh, you simpleton--you simpleton! Anyone can deceive you and take
you in like a--like a,--aren't you ashamed to trust him? Can't you see
that he humbugs you just as much as ever he pleases?"

"I know very well that he does deceive me occasionally, and he knows
that I know it, but--" The prince did not finish his sentence.

"And that's why you trust him, eh? So I should have supposed. Good Lord,
was there ever such a man as you? Tfu! and are you aware, sir, that this
Gania, or his sister Varia, have brought her into correspondence with
Nastasia Philipovna?"

"Brought whom?" cried Muishkin.

"Aglaya."

"I don't believe it! It's impossible! What object could they have?" He
jumped up from his chair in his excitement.

"Nor do I believe it, in spite of the proofs. The girl is self-willed
and fantastic, and insane! She's wicked, wicked! I'll repeat it for
a thousand years that she's wicked; they ALL are, just now, all my
daughters, even that 'wet hen' Alexandra. And yet I don't believe it.
Because I don't choose to believe it, perhaps; but I don't. Why haven't
you been?" she turned on the prince suddenly. "Why didn't you come near
us all these three days, eh?"

The prince began to give his reasons, but she interrupted him again.

"Everybody takes you in and deceives you; you went to town yesterday. I
dare swear you went down on your knees to that rogue, and begged him to
accept your ten thousand roubles!"

"I never thought of doing any such thing. I have not seen him, and he is
not a rogue, in my opinion. I have had a letter from him."

"Show it me!"

The prince took a paper from his pocket-book, and handed it to Lizabetha
Prokofievna. It ran as follows:


"SIR,

"In the eyes of the world I am sure that I have no cause for pride or
self-esteem. I am much too insignificant for that. But what may be so to
other men's eyes is not so to yours. I am convinced that you are better
than other people. Doktorenko disagrees with me, but I am content to
differ from him on this point. I will never accept one single copeck
from you, but you have helped my mother, and I am bound to be grateful
to you for that, however weak it may seem. At any rate, I have changed
my opinion about you, and I think right to inform you of the fact; but I
also suppose that there can be no further inter course between us.

"ANTIP BURDOVSKY.

"P.S.--The two hundred roubles I owe you shall certainly be repaid in
time."


"How extremely stupid!" cried Mrs. Epanchin, giving back the letter
abruptly. "It was not worth the trouble of reading. Why are you
smiling?"

"Confess that you are pleased to have read it."

"What! Pleased with all that nonsense! Why, cannot you see that they are
all infatuated with pride and vanity?"

"He has acknowledged himself to be in the wrong. Don't you see that the
greater his vanity, the more difficult this admission must have been on
his part? Oh, what a little child you are, Lizabetha Prokofievna!"

"Are you tempting me to box your ears for you, or what?"

"Not at all. I am only proving that you are glad about the letter. Why
conceal your real feelings? You always like to do it."

"Never come near my house again!" cried Mrs. Epanchin, pale with rage.
"Don't let me see as much as a SHADOW of you about the place! Do you
hear?"

"Oh yes, and in three days you'll come and invite me yourself. Aren't
you ashamed now? These are your best feelings; you are only tormenting
yourself."

"I'll die before I invite you! I shall forget your very name! I've
forgotten it already!"

She marched towards the door.

"But I'm forbidden your house as it is, without your added threats!"
cried the prince after her.

"What? Who forbade you?"

She turned round so suddenly that one might have supposed a needle had
been stuck into her.

The prince hesitated. He perceived that he had said too much now.

"WHO forbade you?" cried Mrs. Epanchin once more.

"Aglaya Ivanovna told me--"

"When? Speak--quick!"

"She sent to say, yesterday morning, that I was never to dare to come
near the house again."

Lizabetha Prokofievna stood like a stone.

"What did she send? Whom? Was it that boy? Was it a message?-quick!"

"I had a note," said the prince.

"Where is it? Give it here, at once."

The prince thought a moment. Then he pulled out of his waistcoat pocket
an untidy slip of paper, on which was scrawled:


"PRINCE LEF NICOLAIEVITCH,--If you think fit, after all that has passed,
to honour our house with a visit, I can assure you you will not find me
among the number of those who are in any way delighted to see you.

"AGLAYA EPANCHIN."


Mrs. Epanchin reflected a moment. The next minute she flew at the
prince, seized his hand, and dragged him after her to the door.

"Quick--come along!" she cried, breathless with agitation and
impatience. "Come along with me this moment!"

"But you declared I wasn't--"

"Don't be a simpleton. You behave just as though you weren't a man at
all. Come on! I shall see, now, with my own eyes. I shall see all."

"Well, let me get my hat, at least."

"Here's your miserable hat He couldn't even choose a respectable shape
for his hat! Come on! She did that because I took your part and said you
ought to have come--little vixen!--else she would never have sent you
that silly note. It's a most improper note, I call it; most improper for
such an intelligent, well-brought-up girl to write. H'm! I dare say she
was annoyed that you didn't come; but she ought to have known that one
can't write like that to an idiot like you, for you'd be sure to take it
literally." Mrs. Epanchin was dragging the prince along with her all
the time, and never let go of his hand for an instant. "What are you
listening for?" she added, seeing that she had committed herself a
little. "She wants a clown like you--she hasn't seen one for some
time--to play with. That's why she is anxious for you to come to the
house. And right glad I am that she'll make a thorough good fool of you.
You deserve it; and she can do it--oh! she can, indeed!--as well as most
people."




PART III

I.

THE Epanchin family, or at least the more serious members of it, were
sometimes grieved because they seemed so unlike the rest of the world.
They were not quite certain, but had at times a strong suspicion that
things did not happen to them as they did to other people. Others led a
quiet, uneventful life, while they were subject to continual upheavals.
Others kept on the rails without difficulty; they ran off at the
slightest obstacle. Other houses were governed by a timid routine;
theirs was somehow different. Perhaps Lizabetha Prokofievna was alone
in making these fretful observations; the girls, though not wanting in
intelligence, were still young; the general was intelligent, too, but
narrow, and in any difficulty he was content to say, "H'm!" and leave
the matter to his wife. Consequently, on her fell the responsibility. It
was not that they distinguished themselves as a family by any particular
originality, or that their excursions off the track led to any breach of
the proprieties. Oh no.

There was nothing premeditated, there was not even any conscious purpose
in it all, and yet, in spite of everything, the family, although highly
respected, was not quite what every highly respected family ought to be.
For a long time now Lizabetha Prokofievna had had it in her mind that
all the trouble was owing to her "unfortunate character," and this
added to her distress. She blamed her own stupid unconventional
"eccentricity." Always restless, always on the go, she constantly seemed
to lose her way, and to get into trouble over the simplest and more
ordinary affairs of life.

We said at the beginning of our story, that the Epanchins were liked
and esteemed by their neighbours. In spite of his humble origin, Ivan
Fedorovitch himself was received everywhere with respect. He deserved
this, partly on account of his wealth and position, partly because,
though limited, he was really a very good fellow. But a certain
limitation of mind seems to be an indispensable asset, if not to all
public personages, at least to all serious financiers. Added to this,
his manner was modest and unassuming; he knew when to be silent, yet
never allowed himself to be trampled upon. Also--and this was more
important than all--he had the advantage of being under exalted
patronage.

As to Lizabetha Prokofievna, she, as the reader knows, belonged to an
aristocratic family. True, Russians think more of influential friends
than of birth, but she had both. She was esteemed and even loved by
people of consequence in society, whose example in receiving her was
therefore followed by others. It seems hardly necessary to remark that
her family worries and anxieties had little or no foundation, or that
her imagination increased them to an absurd degree; but if you have a
wart on your forehead or nose, you imagine that all the world is looking
at it, and that people would make fun of you because of it, even if you
had discovered America! Doubtless Lizabetha Prokofievna was considered
"eccentric" in society, but she was none the less esteemed: the pity was
that she was ceasing to believe in that esteem. When she thought of
her daughters, she said to herself sorrowfully that she was a hindrance
rather than a help to their future, that her character and temper were
absurd, ridiculous, insupportable. Naturally, she put the blame on her
surroundings, and from morning to night was quarrelling with her husband
and children, whom she really loved to the point of self-sacrifice,
even, one might say, of passion.

She was, above all distressed by the idea that her daughters might grow
up "eccentric," like herself; she believed that no other society girls
were like them. "They are growing into Nihilists!" she repeated over and
over again. For years she had tormented herself with this idea, and with
the question: "Why don't they get married?"

"It is to annoy their mother; that is their one aim in life; it can be
nothing else. The fact is it is all of a piece with these modern ideas,
that wretched woman's question! Six months ago Aglaya took a fancy to
cut off her magnificent hair. Why, even I, when I was young, had nothing
like it! The scissors were in her hand, and I had to go down on my knees
and implore her... She did it, I know, from sheer mischief, to spite
her mother, for she is a naughty, capricious girl, a real spoiled child
spiteful and mischievous to a degree! And then Alexandra wanted to shave
her head, not from caprice or mischief, but, like a little fool, simply
because Aglaya persuaded her she would sleep better without her hair,
and not suffer from headache! And how many suitors have they not had
during the last five years! Excellent offers, too! What more do they
want? Why don't they get married? For no other reason than to vex their
mother--none--none!"

But Lizabetha Prokofievna felt somewhat consoled when she could say that
one of her girls, Adelaida, was settled at last. "It will be one off our
hands!" she declared aloud, though in private she expressed herself with
greater tenderness. The engagement was both happy and suitable, and was
therefore approved in society. Prince S. was a distinguished man, he
had money, and his future wife was devoted to him; what more could
be desired? Lizabetha Prokofievna had felt less anxious about this
daughter, however, although she considered her artistic tastes
suspicious. But to make up for them she was, as her mother expressed it,
"merry," and had plenty of "common-sense." It was Aglaya's future which
disturbed her most. With regard to her eldest daughter, Alexandra, the
mother never quite knew whether there was cause for anxiety or not.
Sometimes she felt as if there was nothing to be expected from her. She
was twenty-five now, and must be fated to be an old maid, and "with such
beauty, too!" The mother spent whole nights in weeping and lamenting,
while all the time the cause of her grief slumbered peacefully. "What is
the matter with her? Is she a Nihilist, or simply a fool?"

But Lizabetha Prokofievna knew perfectly well how unnecessary was the
last question. She set a high value on Alexandra Ivanovna's judgment,
and often consulted her in difficulties; but that she was a 'wet
hen' she never for a moment doubted. "She is so calm; nothing rouses
her--though wet hens are not always calm! Oh! I can't understand
it!" Her eldest daughter inspired Lizabetha with a kind of puzzled
compassion. She did not feel this in Aglaya's case, though the latter
was her idol. It may be said that these outbursts and epithets, such as
"wet hen" (in which the maternal solicitude usually showed itself),
only made Alexandra laugh. Sometimes the most trivial thing annoyed Mrs.
Epanchin, and drove her into a frenzy. For instance, Alexandra Ivanovna
liked to sleep late, and was always dreaming, though her dreams had the
peculiarity of being as innocent and naive as those of a child of seven;
and the very innocence of her dreams annoyed her mother. Once she dreamt
of nine hens, and this was the cause of quite a serious quarrel--no
one knew why. Another time she had--it was most unusual--a dream with
a spark of originality in it. She dreamt of a monk in a dark room, into
which she was too frightened to go. Adelaida and Aglaya rushed off with
shrieks of laughter to relate this to their mother, but she was quite
angry, and said her daughters were all fools.

"H'm! she is as stupid as a fool! A veritable 'wet hen'! Nothing excites
her; and yet she is not happy; some days it makes one miserable only
to look at her! Why is she unhappy, I wonder?" At times Lizabetha
Prokofievna put this question to her husband, and as usual she spoke
in the threatening tone of one who demands an immediate answer. Ivan
Fedorovitch would frown, shrug his shoulders, and at last give his
opinion: "She needs a husband!"

"God forbid that he should share your ideas, Ivan Fedorovitch!" his wife
flashed back. "Or that he should be as gross and churlish as you!"

The general promptly made his escape, and Lizabetha Prokofievna after a
while grew calm again. That evening, of course, she would be unusually
attentive, gentle, and respectful to her "gross and churlish" husband,
her "dear, kind Ivan Fedorovitch," for she had never left off loving
him. She was even still "in love" with him. He knew it well, and for his
part held her in the greatest esteem.

But the mother's great and continual anxiety was Aglaya. "She is exactly
like me--my image in everything," said Mrs. Epanchin to herself. "A
tyrant! A real little demon! A Nihilist! Eccentric, senseless and
mischievous! Good Lord, how unhappy she will be!"

But as we said before, the fact of Adelaida's approaching marriage was
balm to the mother. For a whole month she forgot her fears and worries.

Adelaida's fate was settled; and with her name that of Aglaya's was
linked, in society gossip. People whispered that Aglaya, too, was "as
good as engaged;" and Aglaya always looked so sweet and behaved so
well (during this period), that the mother's heart was full of joy. Of
course, Evgenie Pavlovitch must be thoroughly studied first, before
the final step should be taken; but, really, how lovely dear Aglaya had
become--she actually grew more beautiful every day! And then--Yes, and
then--this abominable prince showed his face again, and everything went
topsy-turvy at once, and everyone seemed as mad as March hares.

What had really happened?

If it had been any other family than the Epanchins', nothing particular
would have happened. But, thanks to Mrs. Epanchin's invariable fussiness
and anxiety, there could not be the slightest hitch in the simplest
matters of everyday life, but she immediately foresaw the most dreadful
and alarming consequences, and suffered accordingly.

What then must have been her condition, when, among all the imaginary
anxieties and calamities which so constantly beset her, she now saw
looming ahead a serious cause for annoyance--something really likely to
arouse doubts and suspicions!

"How dared they, how DARED they write that hateful anonymous letter
informing me that Aglaya is in communication with Nastasia Philipovna?"
she thought, as she dragged the prince along towards her own house,
and again when she sat him down at the round table where the family was
already assembled. "How dared they so much as THINK of such a thing? I
should DIE with shame if I thought there was a particle of truth in it,
or if I were to show the letter to Aglaya herself! Who dares play these
jokes upon US, the Epanchins? WHY didn't we go to the Yelagin instead
of coming down here? I TOLD you we had better go to the Yelagin this
summer, Ivan Fedorovitch. It's all your fault. I dare say it was that
Varia who sent the letter. It's all Ivan Fedorovitch. THAT woman is
doing it all for him, I know she is, to show she can make a fool of him
now just as she did when he used to give her pearls.

"But after all is said, we are mixed up in it. Your daughters are mixed
up in it, Ivan Fedorovitch; young ladies in society, young ladies at an
age to be married; they were present, they heard everything there was to
hear. They were mixed up with that other scene, too, with those dreadful
youths. You must be pleased to remember they heard it all. I cannot
forgive that wretched prince. I never shall forgive him! And why, if you
please, has Aglaya had an attack of nerves for these last three
days? Why has she all but quarrelled with her sisters, even with
Alexandra--whom she respects so much that she always kisses her hands as
though she were her mother? What are all these riddles of hers that we
have to guess? What has Gavrila Ardalionovitch to do with it? Why did
she take upon herself to champion him this morning, and burst into tears
over it? Why is there an allusion to that cursed 'poor knight' in the
anonymous letter? And why did I rush off to him just now like a lunatic,
and drag him back here? I do believe I've gone mad at last. What on
earth have I done now? To talk to a young man about my daughter's
secrets--and secrets having to do with himself, too! Thank goodness,
he's an idiot, and a friend of the house! Surely Aglaya hasn't fallen in
love with such a gaby! What an idea! Pfu! we ought all to be put under
glass cases--myself first of all--and be shown off as curiosities, at
ten copecks a peep!"

"I shall never forgive you for all this, Ivan Fedorovitch--never! Look
at her now. Why doesn't she make fun of him? She said she would, and she
doesn't. Look there! She stares at him with all her eyes, and doesn't
move; and yet she told him not to come. He looks pale enough; and that
abominable chatterbox, Evgenie Pavlovitch, monopolizes the whole of the
conversation. Nobody else can get a word in. I could soon find out all
about everything if I could only change the subject."

The prince certainly was very pale. He sat at the table and seemed to be
feeling, by turns, sensations of alarm and rapture.

Oh, how frightened he was of looking to one side--one particular
corner--whence he knew very well that a pair of dark eyes were watching
him intently, and how happy he was to think that he was once more among
them, and occasionally hearing that well-known voice, although she had
written and forbidden him to come again!

"What on earth will she say to me, I wonder?" he thought to himself.

He had not said a word yet; he sat silent and listened to Evgenie
Pavlovitch's eloquence. The latter had never appeared so happy and
excited as on this evening. The prince listened to him, but for a long
time did not take in a word he said.

Excepting Ivan Fedorovitch, who had not as yet returned from town, the
whole family was present. Prince S. was there; and they all intended to
go out to hear the band very soon.

Colia arrived presently and joined the circle. "So he is received as
usual, after all," thought the prince.

The Epanchins' country-house was a charming building, built after the
model of a Swiss chalet, and covered with creepers. It was surrounded on
all sides by a flower garden, and the family sat, as a rule, on the open
verandah as at the prince's house.

The subject under discussion did not appear to be very popular with the
assembly, and some would have been delighted to change it; but Evgenie
would not stop holding forth, and the prince's arrival seemed to spur
him on to still further oratorical efforts.

Lizabetha Prokofievna frowned, but had not as yet grasped the subject,
which seemed to have arisen out of a heated argument. Aglaya sat apart,
almost in the corner, listening in stubborn silence.

"Excuse me," continued Evgenie Pavlovitch hotly, "I don't say a word
against liberalism. Liberalism is not a sin, it is a necessary part of
a great whole, which whole would collapse and fall to pieces without
it. Liberalism has just as much right to exist as has the most moral
conservatism; but I am attacking RUSSIAN liberalism; and I attack it for
the simple reason that a Russian liberal is not a Russian liberal, he is
a non-Russian liberal. Show me a real Russian liberal, and I'll kiss him
before you all, with pleasure."

"If he cared to kiss you, that is," said Alexandra, whose cheeks were
red with irritation and excitement.

"Look at that, now," thought the mother to herself, "she does nothing
but sleep and eat for a year at a time, and then suddenly flies out in
the most incomprehensible way!"

The prince observed that Alexandra appeared to be angry with Evgenie,
because he spoke on a serious subject in a frivolous manner, pretending
to be in earnest, but with an under-current of irony.

"I was saying just now, before you came in, prince, that there has
been nothing national up to now, about our liberalism, and nothing the
liberals do, or have done, is in the least degree national. They are
drawn from two classes only, the old landowning class, and clerical
families--"

"How, nothing that they have done is Russian?" asked Prince S.

"It may be Russian, but it is not national. Our liberals are not
Russian, nor are our conservatives, and you may be sure that the nation
does not recognize anything that has been done by the landed gentry, or
by the seminarists, or what is to be done either."

"Come, that's good! How can you maintain such a paradox? If you are
serious, that is. I cannot allow such a statement about the landed
proprietors to pass unchallenged. Why, you are a landed proprietor
yourself!" cried Prince S. hotly.

"I suppose you'll say there is nothing national about our literature
either?" said Alexandra.

"Well, I am not a great authority on literary questions, but I
certainly do hold that Russian literature is not Russian, except perhaps
Lomonosoff, Pouschkin and Gogol."

"In the first place, that is a considerable admission, and in the second
place, one of the above was a peasant, and the other two were both
landed proprietors!"

"Quite so, but don't be in such a hurry! For since it has been the part
of these three men, and only these three, to say something absolutely
their own, not borrowed, so by this very fact these three men become
really national. If any Russian shall have done or said anything really
and absolutely original, he is to be called national from that moment,
though he may not be able to talk the Russian language; still he is a
national Russian. I consider that an axiom. But we were not speaking
of literature; we began by discussing the socialists. Very well then,
I insist that there does not exist one single Russian socialist. There
does not, and there has never existed such a one, because all socialists
are derived from the two classes--the landed proprietors, and the
seminarists. All our eminent socialists are merely old liberals of
the class of landed proprietors, men who were liberals in the days of
serfdom. Why do you laugh? Give me their books, give me their studies,
their memoirs, and though I am not a literary critic, yet I will prove
as clear as day that every chapter and every word of their writings has
been the work of a former landed proprietor of the old school. You'll
find that all their raptures, all their generous transports are
proprietary, all their woes and their tears, proprietary; all
proprietary or seminarist! You are laughing again, and you, prince, are
smiling too. Don't you agree with me?"

It was true enough that everybody was laughing, the prince among them.

"I cannot tell you on the instant whether I agree with you or not,"
said the latter, suddenly stopping his laughter, and starting like a
schoolboy caught at mischief. "But, I assure you, I am listening to you
with extreme gratification."

So saying, he almost panted with agitation, and a cold sweat stood upon
his forehead. These were his first words since he had entered the house;
he tried to lift his eyes, and look around, but dared not; Evgenie
Pavlovitch noticed his confusion, and smiled.

"I'll just tell you one fact, ladies and gentlemen," continued the
latter, with apparent seriousness and even exaltation of manner, but
with a suggestion of "chaff" behind every word, as though he were
laughing in his sleeve at his own nonsense--"a fact, the discovery
of which, I believe, I may claim to have made by myself alone. At all
events, no other has ever said or written a word about it; and in this
fact is expressed the whole essence of Russian liberalism of the sort
which I am now considering.

"In the first place, what is liberalism, speaking generally, but an
attack (whether mistaken or reasonable, is quite another question) upon
the existing order of things? Is this so? Yes. Very well. Then my 'fact'
consists in this, that RUSSIAN liberalism is not an attack upon the
existing order of things, but an attack upon the very essence of things
themselves--indeed, on the things themselves; not an attack on the
Russian order of things, but on Russia itself. My Russian liberal
goes so far as to reject Russia; that is, he hates and strikes his own
mother. Every misfortune and mishap of the mother-country fills him with
mirth, and even with ecstasy. He hates the national customs, Russian
history, and everything. If he has a justification, it is that he does
not know what he is doing, and believes that his hatred of Russia is the
grandest and most profitable kind of liberalism. (You will often find
a liberal who is applauded and esteemed by his fellows, but who is in
reality the dreariest, blindest, dullest of conservatives, and is not
aware of the fact.) This hatred for Russia has been mistaken by some of
our 'Russian liberals' for sincere love of their country, and they
boast that they see better than their neighbours what real love of one's
country should consist in. But of late they have grown, more candid and
are ashamed of the expression 'love of country,' and have annihilated
the very spirit of the words as something injurious and petty and
undignified. This is the truth, and I hold by it; but at the same time
it is a phenomenon which has not been repeated at any other time or
place; and therefore, though I hold to it as a fact, yet I recognize
that it is an accidental phenomenon, and may likely enough pass away.
There can be no such thing anywhere else as a liberal who really hates
his country; and how is this fact to be explained among US? By
my original statement that a Russian liberal is NOT a RUSSIAN
liberal--that's the only explanation that I can see."

"I take all that you have said as a joke," said Prince S. seriously.

"I have not seen all kinds of liberals, and cannot, therefore, set
myself up as a judge," said Alexandra, "but I have heard all you have
said with indignation. You have taken some accidental case and twisted
it into a universal law, which is unjust."

"Accidental case!" said Evgenie Pavlovitch. "Do you consider it an
accidental case, prince?"

"I must also admit," said the prince, "that I have not seen much, or
been very far into the question; but I cannot help thinking that you are
more or less right, and that Russian liberalism--that phase of it which
you are considering, at least--really is sometimes inclined to hate
Russia itself, and not only its existing order of things in general. Of
course this is only PARTIALLY the truth; you cannot lay down the law for
all..."

The prince blushed and broke off, without finishing what he meant to
say.

In spite of his shyness and agitation, he could not help being greatly
interested in the conversation. A special characteristic of his was
the naive candour with which he always listened to arguments which
interested him, and with which he answered any questions put to him on
the subject at issue. In the very expression of his face this naivete
was unmistakably evident, this disbelief in the insincerity of others,
and unsuspecting disregard of irony or humour in their words.

But though Evgenie Pavlovitch had put his questions to the prince with
no other purpose but to enjoy the joke of his simple-minded seriousness,
yet now, at his answer, he was surprised into some seriousness himself,
and looked gravely at Muishkin as though he had not expected that sort
of answer at all.

"Why, how strange!" he ejaculated. "You didn't answer me seriously,
surely, did you?"

"Did not you ask me the question seriously" inquired the prince, in
amazement.

Everybody laughed.

"Oh, trust HIM for that!" said Adelaida. "Evgenie Pavlovitch turns
everything and everybody he can lay hold of to ridicule. You should hear
the things he says sometimes, apparently in perfect seriousness."

"In my opinion the conversation has been a painful one throughout, and
we ought never to have begun it," said Alexandra. "We were all going for
a walk--"

"Come along then," said Evgenie; "it's a glorious evening. But, to prove
that this time I was speaking absolutely seriously, and especially
to prove this to the prince (for you, prince, have interested me
exceedingly, and I swear to you that I am not quite such an ass as
I like to appear sometimes, although I am rather an ass, I admit),
and--well, ladies and gentlemen, will you allow me to put just one more
question to the prince, out of pure curiosity? It shall be the last.
This question came into my mind a couple of hours since (you see,
prince, I do think seriously at times), and I made my own decision upon
it; now I wish to hear what the prince will say to it."

"We have just used the expression 'accidental case.' This is a
significant phrase; we often hear it. Well, not long since everyone was
talking and reading about that terrible murder of six people on the part
of a--young fellow, and of the extraordinary speech of the counsel for
the defence, who observed that in the poverty-stricken condition of the
criminal it must have come NATURALLY into his head to kill these six
people. I do not quote his words, but that is the sense of them, or
something very like it. Now, in my opinion, the barrister who put
forward this extraordinary plea was probably absolutely convinced that
he was stating the most liberal, the most humane, the most enlightened
view of the case that could possibly be brought forward in these days.
Now, was this distortion, this capacity for a perverted way of viewing
things, a special or accidental case, or is such a general rule?"

Everyone laughed at this.

"A special case--accidental, of course!" cried Alexandra and Adelaida.

"Let me remind you once more, Evgenie," said Prince S., "that your joke
is getting a little threadbare."

"What do you think about it, prince?" asked Evgenie, taking no notice
of the last remark, and observing Muishkin's serious eyes fixed upon his
face. "What do you think--was it a special or a usual case--the rule, or
an exception? I confess I put the question especially for you."

"No, I don't think it was a special case," said the prince, quietly, but
firmly.

"My dear fellow!" cried Prince S., with some annoyance, "don't you see
that he is chaffing you? He is simply laughing at you, and wants to make
game of you."

"I thought Evgenie Pavlovitch was talking seriously," said the prince,
blushing and dropping his eyes.

"My dear prince," continued Prince S. "remember what you and I were
saying two or three months ago. We spoke of the fact that in our newly
opened Law Courts one could already lay one's finger upon so many
talented and remarkable young barristers. How pleased you were with
the state of things as we found it, and how glad I was to observe your
delight! We both said it was a matter to be proud of; but this clumsy
defence that Evgenie mentions, this strange argument CAN, of course,
only be an accidental case--one in a thousand!"

The prince reflected a little, but very soon he replied, with absolute
conviction in his tone, though he still spoke somewhat shyly and
timidly:

"I only wished to say that this 'distortion,' as Evgenie Pavlovitch
expressed it, is met with very often, and is far more the general rule
than the exception, unfortunately for Russia. So much so, that if this
distortion were not the general rule, perhaps these dreadful crimes
would be less frequent."

"Dreadful crimes? But I can assure you that crimes just as dreadful,
and probably more horrible, have occurred before our times, and at all
times, and not only here in Russia, but everywhere else as well. And in
my opinion it is not at all likely that such murders will cease to occur
for a very long time to come. The only difference is that in former
times there was less publicity, while now everyone talks and writes
freely about such things--which fact gives the impression that such
crimes have only now sprung into existence. That is where your mistake
lies--an extremely natural mistake, I assure you, my dear fellow!" said
Prince S.

"I know that there were just as many, and just as terrible, crimes
before our times. Not long since I visited a convict prison and made
acquaintance with some of the criminals. There were some even more
dreadful criminals than this one we have been speaking of--men who
have murdered a dozen of their fellow-creatures, and feel no remorse
whatever. But what I especially noticed was this, that the very most
hopeless and remorseless murderer--however hardened a criminal he may
be--still KNOWS THAT HE IS A CRIMINAL; that is, he is conscious that
he has acted wickedly, though he may feel no remorse whatever. And they
were all like this. Those of whom Evgenie Pavlovitch has spoken, do not
admit that they are criminals at all; they think they had a right to
do what they did, and that they were even doing a good deed, perhaps.
I consider there is the greatest difference between the two cases.
And recollect--it was a YOUTH, at the particular age which is most
helplessly susceptible to the distortion of ideas!"

Prince S. was now no longer smiling; he gazed at the prince in
bewilderment.

Alexandra, who had seemed to wish to put in her word when the prince
began, now sat silent, as though some sudden thought had caused her to
change her mind about speaking.

Evgenie Pavlovitch gazed at him in real surprise, and this time his
expression of face had no mockery in it whatever.

"What are you looking so surprised about, my friend?" asked Mrs.
Epanchin, suddenly. "Did you suppose he was stupider than yourself, and
was incapable of forming his own opinions, or what?"

"No! Oh no! Not at all!" said Evgenie. "But--how is it, prince, that
you--(excuse the question, will you?)--if you are capable of observing
and seeing things as you evidently do, how is it that you saw nothing
distorted or perverted in that claim upon your property, which you
acknowledged a day or two since; and which was full of arguments founded
upon the most distorted views of right and wrong?"

"I'll tell you what, my friend," cried Mrs. Epanchin, of a sudden, "here
are we all sitting here and imagining we are very clever, and perhaps
laughing at the prince, some of us, and meanwhile he has received a
letter this very day in which that same claimant renounces his claim,
and begs the prince's pardon. There I we don't often get that sort of
letter; and yet we are not ashamed to walk with our noses in the air
before him."

"And Hippolyte has come down here to stay," said Colia, suddenly.

"What! has he arrived?" said the prince, starting up.

"Yes, I brought him down from town just after you had left the house."

"There now! It's just like him," cried Lizabetha Prokofievna, boiling
over once more, and entirely oblivious of the fact that she had
just taken the prince's part. "I dare swear that you went up to town
yesterday on purpose to get the little wretch to do you the great honour
of coming to stay at your house. You did go up to town, you know you
did--you said so yourself! Now then, did you, or did you not, go down on
your knees and beg him to come, confess!"

"No, he didn't, for I saw it all myself," said Colia. "On the contrary,
Hippolyte kissed his hand twice and thanked him; and all the prince said
was that he thought Hippolyte might feel better here in the country!"

"Don't, Colia,--what is the use of saying all that?" cried the prince,
rising and taking his hat.

"Where are you going to now?" cried Mrs. Epanchin.

"Never mind about him now, prince," said Colia. "He is all right and
taking a nap after the journey. He is very happy to be here; but I think
perhaps it would be better if you let him alone for today,--he is very
sensitive now that he is so ill--and he might be embarrassed if you show
him too much attention at first. He is decidedly better today, and says
he has not felt so well for the last six months, and has coughed much
less, too."

The prince observed that Aglaya came out of her corner and approached
the table at this point.

He did not dare look at her, but he was conscious, to the very tips of
his fingers, that she was gazing at him, perhaps angrily; and that she
had probably flushed up with a look of fiery indignation in her black
eyes.

"It seems to me, Mr. Colia, that you were very foolish to bring your
young friend down--if he is the same consumptive boy who wept so
profusely, and invited us all to his own funeral," remarked Evgenie
Pavlovitch. "He talked so eloquently about the blank wall outside his
bedroom window, that I'm sure he will never support life here without
it."

"I think so too," said Mrs. Epanchin; "he will quarrel with you, and be
off," and she drew her workbox towards her with an air of dignity, quite
oblivious of the fact that the family was about to start for a walk in
the park.

"Yes, I remember he boasted about the blank wall in an extraordinary
way," continued Evgenie, "and I feel that without that blank wall
he will never be able to die eloquently; and he does so long to die
eloquently!"

"Oh, you must forgive him the blank wall," said the prince, quietly. "He
has come down to see a few trees now, poor fellow."

"Oh, I forgive him with all my heart; you may tell him so if you like,"
laughed Evgenie.

"I don't think you should take it quite like that," said the prince,
quietly, and without removing his eyes from the carpet. "I think it is
more a case of his forgiving you."

"Forgiving me! why so? What have I done to need his forgiveness?"

"If you don't understand, then--but of course, you do understand.
He wished--he wished to bless you all round and to have your
blessing--before he died--that's all."

"My dear prince," began Prince S., hurriedly, exchanging glances with
some of those present, "you will not easily find heaven on earth, and
yet you seem to expect to. Heaven is a difficult thing to find anywhere,
prince; far more difficult than appears to that good heart of yours.
Better stop this conversation, or we shall all be growing quite
disturbed in our minds, and--"

"Let's go and hear the band, then," said Lizabetha Prokofievna, angrily
rising from her place.

The rest of the company followed her example.

II.

THE prince suddenly approached Evgenie Pavlovitch.

"Evgenie Pavlovitch," he said, with strange excitement and seizing the
latter's hand in his own, "be assured that I esteem you as a generous
and honourable man, in spite of everything. Be assured of that."

Evgenie Pavlovitch fell back a step in astonishment. For one moment it
was all he could do to restrain himself from bursting out laughing; but,
looking closer, he observed that the prince did not seem to be quite
himself; at all events, he was in a very curious state.

"I wouldn't mind betting, prince," he cried, "that you did not in the
least mean to say that, and very likely you meant to address someone
else altogether. What is it? Are you feeling unwell or anything?"

"Very likely, extremely likely, and you must be a very close observer to
detect the fact that perhaps I did not intend to come up to YOU at all."

So saying he smiled strangely; but suddenly and excitedly he began
again:

"Don't remind me of what I have done or said. Don't! I am very much
ashamed of myself, I--"

"Why, what have you done? I don't understand you."

"I see you are ashamed of me, Evgenie Pavlovitch; you are blushing for
me; that's a sign of a good heart. Don't be afraid; I shall go away
directly."

"What's the matter with him? Do his fits begin like that?" said
Lizabetha Prokofievna, in a high state of alarm, addressing Colia.

"No, no, Lizabetha Prokofievna, take no notice of me. I am not going to
have a fit. I will go away directly; but I know I am afflicted. I was
twenty-four years an invalid, you see--the first twenty-four years of my
life--so take all I do and say as the sayings and actions of an
invalid. I'm going away directly, I really am--don't be afraid. I am
not blushing, for I don't think I need blush about it, need I? But I see
that I am out of place in society--society is better without me. It's
not vanity, I assure you. I have thought over it all these last three
days, and I have made up my mind that I ought to unbosom myself candidly
before you at the first opportunity. There are certain things, certain
great ideas, which I must not so much as approach, as Prince S. has
just reminded me, or I shall make you all laugh. I have no sense of
proportion, I know; my words and gestures do not express my ideas--they
are a humiliation and abasement of the ideas, and therefore, I have no
right--and I am too sensitive. Still, I believe I am beloved in this
household, and esteemed far more than I deserve. But I can't help
knowing that after twenty-four years of illness there must be some trace
left, so that it is impossible for people to refrain from laughing at me
sometimes; don't you think so?"

He seemed to pause for a reply, for some verdict, as it were, and looked
humbly around him.

All present stood rooted to the earth with amazement at this unexpected
and apparently uncalled-for outbreak; but the poor prince's painful and
rambling speech gave rise to a strange episode.

"Why do you say all this here?" cried Aglaya, suddenly. "Why do you talk
like this to THEM?"

She appeared to be in the last stages of wrath and irritation; her eyes
flashed. The prince stood dumbly and blindly before her, and suddenly
grew pale.

"There is not one of them all who is worthy of these words of yours,"
continued Aglaya. "Not one of them is worth your little finger, not one
of them has heart or head to compare with yours! You are more honest
than all, and better, nobler, kinder, wiser than all. There are some
here who are unworthy to bend and pick up the handkerchief you have just
dropped. Why do you humiliate yourself like this, and place yourself
lower than these people? Why do you debase yourself before them? Why
have you no pride?"

"My God! Who would ever have believed this?" cried Mrs. Epanchin,
wringing her hands.

"Hurrah for the 'poor knight'!" cried Colia.

"Be quiet! How dare they laugh at me in your house?" said Aglaya,
turning sharply on her mother in that hysterical frame of mind that
rides recklessly over every obstacle and plunges blindly through
proprieties. "Why does everyone, everyone worry and torment me? Why have
they all been bullying me these three days about you, prince? I will
not marry you--never, and under no circumstances! Know that once and for
all; as if anyone could marry an absurd creature like you! Just look in
the glass and see what you look like, this very moment! Why, WHY do they
torment me and say I am going to marry you? You must know it; you are in
the plot with them!"

"No one ever tormented you on the subject," murmured Adelaida, aghast.

"No one ever thought of such a thing! There has never been a word said
about it!" cried Alexandra.

"Who has been annoying her? Who has been tormenting the child? Who
could have said such a thing to her? Is she raving?" cried Lizabetha
Prokofievna, trembling with rage, to the company in general.

"Every one of them has been saying it--every one of them--all these
three days! And I will never, never marry him!"

So saying, Aglaya burst into bitter tears, and, hiding her face in her
handkerchief, sank back into a chair.

"But he has never even--"

"I have never asked you to marry me, Aglaya Ivanovna!" said the prince,
of a sudden.

"WHAT?" cried Mrs. Epanchin, raising her hands in horror. "WHAT'S that?"

She could not believe her ears.

"I meant to say--I only meant to say," said the prince, faltering,
"I merely meant to explain to Aglaya Ivanovna--to have the honour to
explain, as it were--that I had no intention--never had--to ask the
honour of her hand. I assure you I am not guilty, Aglaya Ivanovna, I
am not, indeed. I never did wish to--I never thought of it at all--and
never shall--you'll see it yourself--you may be quite assured of it.
Some wicked person has been maligning me to you; but it's all right.
Don't worry about it."

So saying, the prince approached Aglaya.

She took the handkerchief from her face, glanced keenly at him, took
in what he had said, and burst out laughing--such a merry, unrestrained
laugh, so hearty and gay, that. Adelaida could not contain herself. She,
too, glanced at the prince's panic-stricken countenance, then rushed at
her sister, threw her arms round her neck, and burst into as merry a
fit of laughter as Aglaya's own. They laughed together like a couple of
school-girls. Hearing and seeing this, the prince smiled happily, and in
accents of relief and joy, he exclaimed "Well, thank God--thank God!"

Alexandra now joined in, and it looked as though the three sisters were
going to laugh on for ever.

"They are insane," muttered Lizabetha Prokofievna. "Either they frighten
one out of one's wits, or else--"

But Prince S. was laughing now, too, so was Evgenie Pavlovitch, so was
Colia, and so was the prince himself, who caught the infection as he
looked round radiantly upon the others.

"Come along, let's go out for a walk!" cried Adelaida. "We'll all go
together, and the prince must absolutely go with us. You needn't go
away, you dear good fellow! ISN'T he a dear, Aglaya? Isn't he, mother? I
must really give him a kiss for--for his explanation to Aglaya just now.
Mother, dear, I may kiss him, mayn't I? Aglaya, may I kiss YOUR prince?"
cried the young rogue, and sure enough she skipped up to the prince and
kissed his forehead.

He seized her hands, and pressed them so hard that Adelaida nearly cried
out; he then gazed with delight into her eyes, and raising her right
hand to his lips with enthusiasm, kissed it three times.

"Come along," said Aglaya. "Prince, you must walk with me. May he,
mother? This young cavalier, who won't have me? You said you would NEVER
have me, didn't you, prince? No-no, not like that; THAT'S not the way
to give your arm. Don't you know how to give your arm to a lady yet?
There--so. Now, come along, you and I will lead the way. Would you like
to lead the way with me alone, tete-a-tete?"

She went on talking and chatting without a pause, with occasional little
bursts of laughter between.

"Thank God--thank God!" said Lizabetha Prokofievna to herself, without
quite knowing why she felt so relieved.

"What extraordinary people they are!" thought Prince S., for perhaps
the hundredth time since he had entered into intimate relations with the
family; but--he liked these "extraordinary people," all the same. As for
Prince Lef Nicolaievitch himself, Prince S. did not seem quite to like
him, somehow. He was decidedly preoccupied and a little disturbed as
they all started off.

Evgenie Pavlovitch seemed to be in a lively humour. He made Adelaida and
Alexandra laugh all the way to the Vauxhall; but they both laughed
so very really and promptly that the worthy Evgenie began at last to
suspect that they were not listening to him at all.

At this idea, he burst out laughing all at once, in quite unaffected
mirth, and without giving any explanation.

The sisters, who also appeared to be in high spirits, never tired of
glancing at Aglaya and the prince, who were walking in front. It was
evident that their younger sister was a thorough puzzle to them both.

Prince S. tried hard to get up a conversation with Mrs. Epanchin upon
outside subjects, probably with the good intention of distracting and
amusing her; but he bored her dreadfully. She was absent-minded to a
degree, and answered at cross purposes, and sometimes not at all.

But the puzzle and mystery of Aglaya was not yet over for the evening.
The last exhibition fell to the lot of the prince alone. When they had
proceeded some hundred paces or so from the house, Aglaya said to her
obstinately silent cavalier in a quick half-whisper:

"Look to the right!"

The prince glanced in the direction indicated.

"Look closer. Do you see that bench, in the park there, just by those
three big trees--that green bench?"

The prince replied that he saw it.

"Do you like the position of it? Sometimes of a morning early, at seven
o'clock, when all the rest are still asleep, I come out and sit there
alone."

The prince muttered that the spot was a lovely one.

"Now, go away, I don't wish to have your arm any longer; or perhaps,
better, continue to give me your arm, and walk along beside me, but
don't speak a word to me. I wish to think by myself."

The warning was certainly unnecessary; for the prince would not have
said a word all the rest of the time whether forbidden to speak or not.
His heart beat loud and painfully when Aglaya spoke of the bench; could
she--but no! he banished the thought, after an instant's deliberation.

At Pavlofsk, on weekdays, the public is more select than it is on
Sundays and Saturdays, when the townsfolk come down to walk about and
enjoy the park.

The ladies dress elegantly, on these days, and it is the fashion to
gather round the band, which is probably the best of our pleasure-garden
bands, and plays the newest pieces. The behaviour of the public is most
correct and proper, and there is an appearance of friendly intimacy
among the usual frequenters. Many come for nothing but to look at their
acquaintances, but there are others who come for the sake of the music.
It is very seldom that anything happens to break the harmony of the
proceedings, though, of course, accidents will happen everywhere.

On this particular evening the weather was lovely, and there were
a large number of people present. All the places anywhere near the
orchestra were occupied.

Our friends took chairs near the side exit. The crowd and the music
cheered Mrs. Epanchin a little, and amused the girls; they bowed and
shook hands with some of their friends and nodded at a distance to
others; they examined the ladies' dresses, noticed comicalities
and eccentricities among the people, and laughed and talked among
themselves. Evgenie Pavlovitch, too, found plenty of friends to bow to.
Several people noticed Aglaya and the prince, who were still together.

Before very long two or three young men had come up, and one or two
remained to talk; all of these young men appeared to be on intimate
terms with Evgenie Pavlovitch. Among them was a young officer, a
remarkably handsome fellow--very good-natured and a great chatterbox. He
tried to get up a conversation with Aglaya, and did his best to secure
her attention. Aglaya behaved very graciously to him, and chatted
and laughed merrily. Evgenie Pavlovitch begged the prince's leave to
introduce their friend to him. The prince hardly realized what was
wanted of him, but the introduction came off; the two men bowed and
shook hands.

Evgenie Pavlovitch's friend asked the prince some question, but the
latter did not reply, or if he did, he muttered something so strangely
indistinct that there was nothing to be made of it. The officer stared
intently at him, then glanced at Evgenie, divined why the latter had
introduced him, and gave his undivided attention to Aglaya again. Only
Evgenie Pavlovitch observed that Aglaya flushed up for a moment at this.

The prince did not notice that others were talking and making themselves
agreeable to Aglaya; in fact, at moments, he almost forgot that he was
sitting by her himself. At other moments he felt a longing to go away
somewhere and be alone with his thoughts, and to feel that no one knew
where he was.

Or if that were impossible he would like to be alone at home, on the
terrace-without either Lebedeff or his children, or anyone else about
him, and to lie there and think--a day and night and another day again!
He thought of the mountains-and especially of a certain spot which he
used to frequent, whence he would look down upon the distant valleys and
fields, and see the waterfall, far off, like a little silver thread,
and the old ruined castle in the distance. Oh! how he longed to be there
now--alone with his thoughts--to think of one thing all his life--one
thing! A thousand years would not be too much time! And let everyone
here forget him--forget him utterly! How much better it would have been
if they had never known him--if all this could but prove to be a dream.
Perhaps it was a dream!

Now and then he looked at Aglaya for five minutes at a time, without
taking his eyes off her face; but his expression was very strange;
he would gaze at her as though she were an object a couple of miles
distant, or as though he were looking at her portrait and not at herself
at all.

"Why do you look at me like that, prince?" she asked suddenly, breaking
off her merry conversation and laughter with those about her. "I'm
afraid of you! You look as though you were just going to put out
your hand and touch my face to see if it's real! Doesn't he, Evgenie
Pavlovitch--doesn't he look like that?"

The prince seemed surprised that he should have been addressed at all;
he reflected a moment, but did not seem to take in what had been said
to him; at all events, he did not answer. But observing that she and
the others had begun to laugh, he too opened his mouth and laughed with
them.

The laughter became general, and the young officer, who seemed a
particularly lively sort of person, simply shook with mirth.

Aglaya suddenly whispered angrily to herself the word--

"Idiot!"

"My goodness--surely she is not in love with such a--surely she isn't
mad!" groaned Mrs. Epanchin, under her breath.

"It's all a joke, mamma; it's just a joke like the 'poor
knight'--nothing more whatever, I assure you!" Alexandra whispered
in her ear. "She is chaffing him--making a fool of him, after her
own private fashion, that's all! But she carries it just a little
too far--she is a regular little actress. How she frightened us just
now--didn't she?--and all for a lark!"

"Well, it's lucky she has happened upon an idiot, then, that's all I
can say!" whispered Lizabetha Prokofievna, who was somewhat comforted,
however, by her daughter's remark.

The prince had heard himself referred to as "idiot," and had shuddered
at the moment; but his shudder, it so happened, was not caused by the
word applied to him. The fact was that in the crowd, not far from where
lie was sitting, a pale familiar face, with curly black hair, and a
well-known smile and expression, had flashed across his vision for a
moment, and disappeared again. Very likely he had imagined it! There
only remained to him the impression of a strange smile, two eyes, and
a bright green tie. Whether the man had disappeared among the crowd, or
whether he had turned towards the Vauxhall, the prince could not say.

But a moment or two afterwards he began to glance keenly about him. That
first vision might only too likely be the forerunner of a second; it was
almost certain to be so. Surely he had not forgotten the possibility
of such a meeting when he came to the Vauxhall? True enough, he had not
remarked where he was coming to when he set out with Aglaya; he had not
been in a condition to remark anything at all.

Had he been more careful to observe his companion, he would have seen
that for the last quarter of an hour Aglaya had also been glancing
around in apparent anxiety, as though she expected to see someone, or
something particular, among the crowd of people. Now, at the moment when
his own anxiety became so marked, her excitement also increased visibly,
and when he looked about him, she did the same.

The reason for their anxiety soon became apparent. From that very side
entrance to the Vauxhall, near which the prince and all the Epanchin
party were seated, there suddenly appeared quite a large knot of
persons, at least a dozen.

Heading this little band walked three ladies, two of whom were
remarkably lovely; and there was nothing surprising in the fact that
they should have had a large troop of admirers following in their wake.

But there was something in the appearance of both the ladies and their
admirers which was peculiar, quite different for that of the rest of the
public assembled around the orchestra.

Nearly everyone observed the little band advancing, and all pretended
not to see or notice them, except a few young fellows who exchanged
glances and smiled, saying something to one another in whispers.

It was impossible to avoid noticing them, however, in reality, for they
made their presence only too conspicuous by laughing and talking loudly.
It was to be supposed that some of them were more than half drunk,
although they were well enough dressed, some even particularly well.
There were one or two, however, who were very strange-looking creatures,
with flushed faces and extraordinary clothes; some were military men;
not all were quite young; one or two were middle-aged gentlemen of
decidedly disagreeable appearance, men who are avoided in society like
the plague, decked out in large gold studs and rings, and magnificently
"got up," generally.

Among our suburban resorts there are some which enjoy a specially
high reputation for respectability and fashion; but the most careful
individual is not absolutely exempt from the danger of a tile falling
suddenly upon his head from his neighbour's roof.

Such a tile was about to descend upon the elegant and decorous public
now assembled to hear the music.

In order to pass from the Vauxhall to the band-stand, the visitor has
to descend two or three steps. Just at these steps the group paused, as
though it feared to proceed further; but very quickly one of the three
ladies, who formed its apex, stepped forward into the charmed circle,
followed by two members of her suite.

One of these was a middle-aged man of very respectable appearance, but
with the stamp of parvenu upon him, a man whom nobody knew, and who
evidently knew nobody. The other follower was younger and far less
respectable-looking.

No one else followed the eccentric lady; but as she descended the steps
she did not even look behind her, as though it were absolutely the same
to her whether anyone were following or not. She laughed and talked
loudly, however, just as before. She was dressed with great taste, but
with rather more magnificence than was needed for the occasion, perhaps.

She walked past the orchestra, to where an open carriage was waiting,
near the road.

The prince had not seen HER for more than three months. All these days
since his arrival from Petersburg he had intended to pay her a visit,
but some mysterious presentiment had restrained him. He could not
picture to himself what impression this meeting with her would make upon
him, though he had often tried to imagine it, with fear and trembling.
One fact was quite certain, and that was that the meeting would be
painful.

Several times during the last six months he had recalled the effect
which the first sight of this face had had upon him, when he only saw
its portrait. He recollected well that even the portrait face had left
but too painful an impression.

That month in the provinces, when he had seen this woman nearly every
day, had affected him so deeply that he could not now look back upon
it calmly. In the very look of this woman there was something which
tortured him. In conversation with Rogojin he had attributed this
sensation to pity--immeasurable pity, and this was the truth. The sight
of the portrait face alone had filled his heart full of the agony of
real sympathy; and this feeling of sympathy, nay, of actual SUFFERING,
for her, had never left his heart since that hour, and was still in full
force. Oh yes, and more powerful than ever!

But the prince was not satisfied with what he had said to Rogojin. Only
at this moment, when she suddenly made her appearance before him, did
he realize to the full the exact emotion which she called up in him, and
which he had not described correctly to Rogojin.

And, indeed, there were no words in which he could have expressed his
horror, yes, HORROR, for he was now fully convinced from his own private
knowledge of her, that the woman was mad.

If, loving a woman above everything in the world, or at least having a
foretaste of the possibility of such love for her, one were suddenly to
behold her on a chain, behind bars and under the lash of a keeper, one
would feel something like what the poor prince now felt.

"What's the matter?" asked Aglaya, in a whisper, giving his sleeve a
little tug.

He turned his head towards her and glanced at her black and (for some
reason) flashing eyes, tried to smile, and then, apparently forgetting
her in an instant, turned to the right once more, and continued to watch
the startling apparition before him.

Nastasia Philipovna was at this moment passing the young ladies' chairs.

Evgenie Pavlovitch continued some apparently extremely funny and
interesting anecdote to Alexandra, speaking quickly and with much
animation. The prince remembered that at this moment Aglaya remarked in
a half-whisper:

"WHAT a--"

She did not finish her indefinite sentence; she restrained herself in a
moment; but it was enough.

Nastasia Philipovna, who up to now had been walking along as though she
had not noticed the Epanchin party, suddenly turned her head in their
direction, as though she had just observed Evgenie Pavlovitch sitting
there for the first time.

"Why, I declare, here he is!" she cried, stopping suddenly. "The man one
can't find with all one's messengers sent about the place, sitting just
under one's nose, exactly where one never thought of looking! I thought
you were sure to be at your uncle's by this time."

Evgenie Pavlovitch flushed up and looked angrily at Nastasia Philipovna,
then turned his back on her.

"What I don't you know about it yet? He doesn't know--imagine that! Why,
he's shot himself. Your uncle shot himself this very morning. I was told
at two this afternoon. Half the town must know it by now. They say there
are three hundred and fifty thousand roubles, government money, missing;
some say five hundred thousand. And I was under the impression that he
would leave you a fortune! He's whistled it all away. A most depraved
old gentleman, really! Well, ta, ta!--bonne chance! Surely you intend
to be off there, don't you? Ha, ha! You've retired from the army in good
time, I see! Plain clothes! Well done, sly rogue! Nonsense! I see--you
knew it all before--I dare say you knew all about it yesterday-"

Although the impudence of this attack, this public proclamation of
intimacy, as it were, was doubtless premeditated, and had its special
object, yet Evgenie Pavlovitch at first seemed to intend to make no
show of observing either his tormentor or her words. But Nastasia's
communication struck him with the force of a thunderclap. On hearing
of his uncle's death he suddenly grew as white as a sheet, and turned
towards his informant.

At this moment, Lizabetha Prokofievna rose swiftly from her seat,
beckoned her companions, and left the place almost at a run.

Only the prince stopped behind for a moment, as though in indecision;
and Evgenie Pavlovitch lingered too, for he had not collected his
scattered wits. But the Epanchins had not had time to get more than
twenty paces away when a scandalous episode occurred. The young officer,
Evgenie Pavlovitch's friend who had been conversing with Aglaya, said
aloud in a great state of indignation:

"She ought to be whipped--that's the only way to deal with creatures
like that--she ought to be whipped!"

This gentleman was a confidant of Evgenie's, and had doubtless heard of
the carriage episode.

Nastasia turned to him. Her eyes flashed; she rushed up to a young man
standing near, whom she did not know in the least, but who happened to
have in his hand a thin cane. Seizing this from him, she brought it with
all her force across the face of her insulter.

All this occurred, of course, in one instant of time.

The young officer, forgetting himself, sprang towards her. Nastasia's
followers were not by her at the moment (the elderly gentleman having
disappeared altogether, and the younger man simply standing aside and
roaring with laughter).

In another moment, of course, the police would have been on the spot,
and it would have gone hard with Nastasia Philipovna had not unexpected
aid appeared.

Muishkin, who was but a couple of steps away, had time to spring forward
and seize the officer's arms from behind.

The officer, tearing himself from the prince's grasp, pushed him so
violently backwards that he staggered a few steps and then subsided into
a chair.

But there were other defenders for Nastasia on the spot by this time.
The gentleman known as the "boxer" now confronted the enraged officer.

"Keller is my name, sir; ex-lieutenant," he said, very loud. "If you
will accept me as champion of the fair sex, I am at your disposal.
English boxing has no secrets from me. I sympathize with you for the
insult you have received, but I can't permit you to raise your hand
against a woman in public. If you prefer to meet me--as would be more
fitting to your rank--in some other manner, of course you understand me,
captain."

But the young officer had recovered himself, and was no longer
listening. At this moment Rogojin appeared, elbowing through the crowd;
he took Nastasia's hand, drew it through his arm, and quickly led her
away. He appeared to be terribly excited; he was trembling all over,
and was as pale as a corpse. As he carried Nastasia off, he turned and
grinned horribly in the officer's face, and with low malice observed:

"Tfu! look what the fellow got! Look at the blood on his cheek! Ha, ha!"

Recollecting himself, however, and seeing at a glance the sort of people
he had to deal with, the officer turned his back on both his opponents,
and courteously, but concealing his face with his handkerchief,
approached the prince, who was now rising from the chair into which he
had fallen.

"Prince Muishkin, I believe? The gentleman to whom I had the honour of
being introduced?"

"She is mad, insane--I assure you, she is mad," replied the prince in
trembling tones, holding out both his hands mechanically towards the
officer.

"I cannot boast of any such knowledge, of course, but I wished to know
your name."

He bowed and retired without waiting for an answer.

Five seconds after the disappearance of the last actor in this scene,
the police arrived. The whole episode had not lasted more than a couple
of minutes. Some of the spectators had risen from their places, and
departed altogether; some merely exchanged their seats for others a
little further off; some were delighted with the occurrence, and talked
and laughed over it for a long time.

In a word, the incident closed as such incidents do, and the band began
to play again. The prince walked away after the Epanchin party. Had
he thought of looking round to the left after he had been pushed so
unceremoniously into the chair, he would have observed Aglaya standing
some twenty yards away. She had stayed to watch the scandalous scene in
spite of her mother's and sisters' anxious cries to her to come away.

Prince S. ran up to her and persuaded her, at last, to come home with
them.

Lizabetha Prokofievna saw that she returned in such a state of agitation
that it was doubtful whether she had even heard their calls. But only a
couple of minutes later, when they had reached the park, Aglaya suddenly
remarked, in her usual calm, indifferent voice:

"I wanted to see how the farce would end."

III.

THE occurrence at the Vauxhall had filled both mother and daughters with
something like horror. In their excitement Lizabetha Prokofievna and the
girls were nearly running all the way home.

In her opinion there was so much disclosed and laid bare by the episode,
that, in spite of the chaotic condition of her mind, she was able to
feel more or less decided on certain points which, up to now, had been
in a cloudy condition.

However, one and all of the party realized that something important
had happened, and that, perhaps fortunately enough, something which had
hitherto been enveloped in the obscurity of guess-work had now begun to
come forth a little from the mists. In spite of Prince S.'s assurances
and explanations, Evgenie Pavlovitch's real character and position were
at last coming to light. He was publicly convicted of intimacy with
"that creature." So thought Lizabetha Prokofievna and her two elder
daughters.

But the real upshot of the business was that the number of riddles to
be solved was augmented. The two girls, though rather irritated at their
mother's exaggerated alarm and haste to depart from the scene, had been
unwilling to worry her at first with questions.

Besides, they could not help thinking that their sister Aglaya probably
knew more about the whole matter than both they and their mother put
together.

Prince S. looked as black as night, and was silent and moody. Mrs.
Epanchin did not say a word to him all the way home, and he did not seem
to observe the fact. Adelaida tried to pump him a little by asking, "who
was the uncle they were talking about, and what was it that had happened
in Petersburg?" But he had merely muttered something disconnected about
"making inquiries," and that "of course it was all nonsense." "Oh, of
course," replied Adelaida, and asked no more questions. Aglaya, too, was
very quiet; and the only remark she made on the way home was that they
were "walking much too fast to be pleasant."

Once she turned and observed the prince hurrying after them. Noticing
his anxiety to catch them up, she smiled ironically, and then looked
back no more. At length, just as they neared the house, General Epanchin
came out and met them; he had only just arrived from town.

His first word was to inquire after Evgenie Pavlovitch. But Lizabetha
stalked past him, and neither looked at him nor answered his question.

He immediately judged from the faces of his daughters and Prince S. that
there was a thunderstorm brewing, and he himself already bore evidences
of unusual perturbation of mind.

He immediately button-holed Prince S., and standing at the front door,
engaged in a whispered conversation with him. By the troubled aspect of
both of them, when they entered the house, and approached Mrs. Epanchin,
it was evident that they had been discussing very disturbing news.

Little by little the family gathered together upstairs in Lizabetha
Prokofievna's apartments, and Prince Muishkin found himself alone on
the verandah when he arrived. He settled himself in a corner and sat
waiting, though he knew not what he expected. It never struck him that
he had better go away, with all this disturbance in the house. He seemed
to have forgotten all the world, and to be ready to sit on where he was
for years on end. From upstairs he caught sounds of excited conversation
every now and then.

He could not say how long he sat there. It grew late and became quite
dark.

Suddenly Aglaya entered the verandah. She seemed to be quite calm,
though a little pale.

Observing the prince, whom she evidently did not expect to see there,
alone in the corner, she smiled, and approached him:

"What are you doing there?" she asked.

The prince muttered something, blushed, and jumped up; but Aglaya
immediately sat down beside him; so he reseated himself.

She looked suddenly, but attentively into his face, then at the window,
as though thinking of something else, and then again at him.

"Perhaps she wants to laugh at me," thought the prince, "but no; for if
she did she certainly would do so."

"Would you like some tea? I'll order some," she said, after a minute or
two of silence.

"N-no thanks, I don't know--"

"Don't know! How can you not know? By-the-by, look here--if someone
were to challenge you to a duel, what should you do? I wished to ask you
this--some time ago--"

"Why? Nobody would ever challenge me to a duel!"

"But if they were to, would you be dreadfully frightened?"

"I dare say I should be--much alarmed!"

"Seriously? Then are you a coward?"

"N-no!--I don't think so. A coward is a man who is afraid and runs away;
the man who is frightened but does not run away, is not quite a coward,"
said the prince with a smile, after a moment's thought.

"And you wouldn't run away?"

"No--I don't think I should run away," replied the prince, laughing
outright at last at Aglaya's questions.

"Though I am a woman, I should certainly not run away for anything,"
said Aglaya, in a slightly pained voice. "However, I see you are
laughing at me and twisting your face up as usual in order to make
yourself look more interesting. Now tell me, they generally shoot at
twenty paces, don't they? At ten, sometimes? I suppose if at ten they
must be either wounded or killed, mustn't they?"

"I don't think they often kill each other at duels."

"They killed Pushkin that way."

"That may have been an accident."

"Not a bit of it; it was a duel to the death, and he was killed."

"The bullet struck so low down that probably his antagonist would never
have aimed at that part of him--people never do; he would have aimed at
his chest or head; so that probably the bullet hit him accidentally. I
have been told this by competent authorities."

"Well, a soldier once told me that they were always ordered to aim at
the middle of the body. So you see they don't aim at the chest or head;
they aim lower on purpose. I asked some officer about this afterwards,
and he said it was perfectly true."

"That is probably when they fire from a long distance."

"Can you shoot at all?"

"No, I have never shot in my life."

"Can't you even load a pistol?"

"No! That is, I understand how it's done, of course, but I have never
done it."

"Then, you don't know how, for it is a matter that needs practice. Now
listen and learn; in the first place buy good powder, not damp (they say
it mustn't be at all damp, but very dry), some fine kind it is--you must
ask for PISTOL powder, not the stuff they load cannons with. They say
one makes the bullets oneself, somehow or other. Have you got a pistol?"

"No--and I don't want one," said the prince, laughing.

"Oh, what NONSENSE! You must buy one. French or English are the best,
they say. Then take a little powder, about a thimbleful, or perhaps two,
and pour it into the barrel. Better put plenty. Then push in a bit of
felt (it MUST be felt, for some reason or other); you can easily get
a bit off some old mattress, or off a door; it's used to keep the cold
out. Well, when you have pushed the felt down, put the bullet in; do you
hear now? The bullet last and the powder first, not the other way, or
the pistol won't shoot. What are you laughing at? I wish you to buy
a pistol and practise every day, and you must learn to hit a mark for
CERTAIN; will you?"

The prince only laughed. Aglaya stamped her foot with annoyance.

Her serious air, however, during this conversation had surprised him
considerably. He had a feeling that he ought to be asking her something,
that there was something he wanted to find out far more important than
how to load a pistol; but his thoughts had all scattered, and he was
only aware that she was sitting by, him, and talking to him, and that
he was looking at her; as to what she happened to be saying to him, that
did not matter in the least.

The general now appeared on the verandah, coming from upstairs. He was
on his way out, with an expression of determination on his face, and of
preoccupation and worry also.

"Ah! Lef Nicolaievitch, it's you, is it? Where are you off to now?" he
asked, oblivious of the fact that the prince had not showed the least
sign of moving. "Come along with me; I want to say a word or two to
you."

"Au revoir, then!" said Aglaya, holding out her hand to the prince.

It was quite dark now, and Muishkin could not see her face clearly, but
a minute or two later, when he and the general had left the villa, he
suddenly flushed up, and squeezed his right hand tightly.

It appeared that he and the general were going in the same direction. In
spite of the lateness of the hour, the general was hurrying away to talk
to someone upon some important subject. Meanwhile he talked incessantly
but disconnectedly to the prince, and continually brought in the name of
Lizabetha Prokofievna.

If the prince had been in a condition to pay more attention to what
the general was saying, he would have discovered that the latter was
desirous of drawing some information out of him, or indeed of asking him
some question outright; but that he could not make up his mind to come
to the point.

Muishkin was so absent, that from the very first he could not attend
to a word the other was saying; and when the general suddenly stopped
before him with some excited question, he was obliged to confess,
ignominiously, that he did not know in the least what he had been
talking about.

The general shrugged his shoulders.

"How strange everyone, yourself included, has become of late," said
he. "I was telling you that I cannot in the least understand Lizabetha
Prokofievna's ideas and agitations. She is in hysterics up there, and
moans and says that we have been 'shamed and disgraced.' How? Why? When?
By whom? I confess that I am very much to blame myself; I do not conceal
the fact; but the conduct, the outrageous behaviour of this woman, must
really be kept within limits, by the police if necessary, and I am just
on my way now to talk the question over and make some arrangements.
It can all be managed quietly and gently, even kindly, and without the
slightest fuss or scandal. I foresee that the future is pregnant with
events, and that there is much that needs explanation. There is intrigue
in the wind; but if on one side nothing is known, on the other side
nothing will be explained. If I have heard nothing about it, nor have
YOU, nor HE, nor SHE--who HAS heard about it, I should like to know? How
CAN all this be explained except by the fact that half of it is mirage
or moonshine, or some hallucination of that sort?"

"SHE is insane," muttered the prince, suddenly recollecting all that had
passed, with a spasm of pain at his heart.
