always swollen with hard work, over the steam. Then, biting off a tiny
bit of sugar, he bowed to his hosts, said, 'Your health!' and drew in
the steaming liquid.

'If somebody would see us as far as the turning,' said Vasili
Andreevich.

'Well, we can do that,' said the eldest son. 'Petrushka will harness and
go that far with you.'

'Well, then, put in the horse, lad, and I shall be thankful to you for
it.'

'Oh, what for, dear man?' said the kindly old woman. 'We are heartily
glad to do it.'

'Petrushka, go and put in the mare,' said the eldest brother.

'All right,' replied Petrushka with a smile, and promptly snatching his
cap down from a nail he ran away to harness.

While the horse was being harnessed the talk returned to the point at
which it had stopped when Vasili Andreevich drove up to the window. The
old man had been complaining to his neighbour, the village elder, about
his third son who had not sent him anything for the holiday though he
had sent a French shawl to his wife.

'The young people are getting out of hand,' said the old man.

'And how they do!' said the neighbour. 'There's no managing them! They
know too much. There's Demochkin now, who broke his father's arm. It's
all from being too clever, it seems.'

Nikita listened, watched their faces, and evidently would have liked to
share in the conversation, but he was too busy drinking his tea and only
nodded his head approvingly. He emptied one tumbler after another and
grew warmer and warmer and more and more comfortable. The talk continued
on the same subject for a long time--the harmfulness of a household
dividing up--and it was clearly not an abstract discussion but concerned
the question of a separation in that house; a separation demanded by the
second son who sat there morosely silent.

It was evidently a sore subject and absorbed them all, but out of
propriety they did not discuss their private affairs before strangers.
At last, however, the old man could not restrain himself, and with tears
in his eyes declared that he would not consent to a break-up of the
family during his lifetime, that his house was prospering, thank God,
but that if they separated they would all have to go begging.

'Just like the Matveevs,' said the neighbour. 'They used to have a
proper house, but now they've split up none of them has anything.'

'And that is what you want to happen to us,' said the old man, turning
to his son.

The son made no reply and there was an awkward pause. The silence was
broken by Petrushka, who having harnessed the horse had returned to the
hut a few minutes before this and had been listening all the time with a
smile.

'There's a fable about that in Paulson,' he said. 'A father gave his
sons a broom to break. At first they could not break it, but when they
took it twig by twig they broke it easily. And it's the same here,' and
he gave a broad smile. 'I'm ready!' he added.

'If you're ready, let's go,' said Vasili Andreevich. 'And as to
separating, don't you allow it, Grandfather. You got everything together
and you're the master. Go to the Justice of the Peace. He'll say how
things should be done.'

'He carries on so, carries on so,' the old man continued in a whining
tone. 'There's no doing anything with him. It's as if the devil
possessed him.'

Nikita having meanwhile finished his fifth tumbler of tea laid it on
its side instead of turning it upside down, hoping to be offered a sixth
glass. But there was no more water in the samovar, so the hostess did
not fill it up for him. Besides, Vasili Andreevich was putting his
things on, so there was nothing for it but for Nikita to get up too, put
back into the sugar-basin the lump of sugar he had nibbled all round,
wipe his perspiring face with the skirt of his sheepskin, and go to put
on his overcoat.

Having put it on he sighed deeply, thanked his hosts, said good-bye,
and went out of the warm bright room into the cold dark passage, through
which the wind was howling and where snow was blowing through the cracks
of the shaking door, and from there into the yard.

Petrushka stood in his sheepskin in the middle of the yard by his horse,
repeating some lines from Paulson's primer. He said with a smile:

     'Storms with mist the sky conceal,
     Snowy circles wheeling wild.
     Now like savage beast 'twill howl,
     And now 'tis wailing like a child.'

Nikita nodded approvingly as he arranged the reins.

The old man, seeing Vasili Andreevich off, brought a lantern into the
passage to show him a light, but it was blown out at once. And even in
the yard it was evident that the snowstorm had become more violent.

'Well, this is weather!' thought Vasili Andreevich. 'Perhaps we may not
get there after all. But there is nothing to be done. Business! Besides,
we have got ready, our host's horse has been harnessed, and we'll get
there with God's help!'

Their aged host also thought they ought not to go, but he had already
tried to persuade them to stay and had not been listened to.

'It's no use asking them again. Maybe my age makes me timid. They'll
get there all right, and at least we shall get to bed in good time and
without any fuss,' he thought.

Petrushka did not think of danger. He knew the road and the whole
district so well, and the lines about 'snowy circles wheeling wild'
described what was happening outside so aptly that it cheered him up.
Nikita did not wish to go at all, but he had been accustomed not to have
his own way and to serve others for so long that there was no one to
hinder the departing travellers.




V

Vasili Andreevich went over to his sledge, found it with difficulty in
the darkness, climbed in and took the reins.
