Never utter a word anywhere, which you would be ashamed to speak in the
presence of the most religious man. Try this practice a little, and you
will soon have command of yourself.

Do not be known as an egotist. No man is more dreaded in society, or
accounted a greater “bore” than he whose every other word is “I,” “me,”
or “my.” Show an interest in all that others say of themselves, but
speak but little of your own affairs.

It is quite as bad to be a mere relater of scandal or the affairs of
your neighbors. A female gossip is detestable, but a male gossip is not
only detestable but utterly despicable.

A celebrated English lawyer gives the following directions for young men
entering into business. He says:--

“SELECT THE KIND OF BUSINESS THAT SUITS YOUR NATURAL INCLINATIONS AND
TEMPERAMENT.--Some men are naturally mechanics; others have a strong
aversion to anything like machinery, and so on; one man has a natural
taste for one occupation in life, and another for another.

“I never could succeed as a merchant. I have tried it, unsuccessfully,
several times. I never could be content with a fixed salary, for mine is
a purely speculative disposition, while others are just the reverse; and
therefore all should be careful to select those occupations that suit
them best.

“LET YOUR PLEDGED WORD EVER BE SACRED.--Never promise to do a thing
without performing it with the most rigid promptness. Nothing is more
valuable to a man in business than the name of always doing as he
agrees, and that to the moment. A strict adherence to this rule gives a
man the command of half the spare funds within the range of his
acquaintance, and encircles him with a host of friends, who may be
depended upon in any emergency.

“WHATEVER YOU DO, DO WITH ALL YOUR MIGHT.--Work at it, if necessary,
early and late, in season and out of season, not leaving a stone
unturned, and never deferring for a single hour that which can just as
well be done _now_. The old proverb is full of truth and
meaning--“Whatever is worth doing at all, is worth doing well.” Many a
man acquires a fortune by doing his business _thoroughly_, while his
neighbor remains poor for life, because he only _half_ does his
business. Ambition, energy, industry, and perseverance, are
indispensable requisites for success in business.

“SOBRIETY. USE NO DESCRIPTION OF INTOXICATING DRINKS.--As no man can
succeed in business unless he has a _brain_ to enable him to lay his
plans, and _reason_ to guide him in their execution, so, no matter how
bountifully a man may be blessed with intelligence, if his brain is
muddled, and his judgment warped by intoxicating drinks, it is
impossible for him to carry on business successfully. How many good
opportunities have passed never to return, while a man was sipping a
‘social glass’ with a friend! How many a foolish bargain has been made
under the influence of the wine-cup, which temporarily makes his victim
so _rich_! How many important chances have been put off until to-morrow,
and thence for ever, because indulgence has thrown the system into a
state of lassitude, neutralizing the energies so essential to success in
business. The use of intoxicating drinks as a beverage is as much an
infatuation as is the smoking of opium by the Chinese, and the former is
quite as destructive to the success of the business man as the latter.

“LET HOPE PREDOMINATE, BUT BE NOT TOO VISIONARY.--Many persons are
always kept poor because they are too _visionary_. Every project looks
to them like certain success, and, therefore, they keep changing from
one business to another, always in hot water, and always ‘under the
harrow.’ The plan of ‘counting the chickens before they are hatched,’ is
an error of ancient date, but it does not seem to improve by age.

“DO NOT SCATTER YOUR POWERS.--Engage in one kind of business only, and
stick to it faithfully until you succeed, or until you conclude to
abandon it. A constant hammering on one nail will generally drive it
home at last, so that it can be clinched. When a man’s undivided
attention is centered on one object, his mind will continually be
suggesting improvements of value, which would escape him if his brain
were occupied by a dozen different subjects at once. Many a fortune has
slipped through men’s fingers by engaging in too many occupations at
once.

“ENGAGE PROPER EMPLOYEES.--Never employ a man of bad habits when one
whose habits are good can be found to fill his situation. I have
generally been extremely fortunate in having faithful and competent
persons to fill the responsible situations in my business; and a man can
scarcely be too grateful for such a blessing. When you find a man unfit
to fill his station, either from incapacity or peculiarity of character
or disposition, dispense with his services, and do not drag out a
miserable existence in the vain attempt to change his nature. It is
utterly impossible to do so, ‘You cannot make a silk purse,’ &c. He has
been created for some other sphere; let him find and fill it.”

If you wish to succeed in society, and be known as a man who converses
well, you must cultivate your memory. Do not smile and tell me that this
is a gift, not an acquirement. It is true that some people have
naturally a more retentive memory than others, but those naturally most
deficient may strengthen their powers by cultivation.

Cultivate, therefore, this glorious faculty, by storing and exercising
it with trains of imagery. Accustom yourselves to look at any natural
object, and then consider how many facts and thoughts may be associated
with it--how much of poetic imagery and refined combinations. Follow out
this idea, and you will find that imagination, which is too often in
youth permitted to build up castles in the air, tenantless as they are
unprofitable, will become, if duly exercised, a source of much
enjoyment. I was led into this train of thought while walking in a
beautiful country, and seeing before me a glorious rainbow, over-arching
the valley which lay in front. And not more quickly than its appearance,
came to my remembrance an admirable passage in the “Art of Poetic
Painting,” wherein the author suggests the great mental advantage of
exercising the mind on all subjects, by considering--

    “What use can be made of them?
    What remarks they will illustrate?
    What representations they will serve?
    What comparison they will furnish?”

And while thus thinking, I remembered that the ingenious author has
instanced the rainbow as affording a variety of illustrations, and
capable, in the imagery which it suggests, of numerous combinations.
Thus:


THE HUES OF THE RAINBOW

    Tinted the green and flowery banks of the stream;
    Tinged the white blossoms of the apple orchards;
    Shed a beauteous radiance on the grass;
    Veiled the waning moon and the evening star;
    Over-arched the mist of the waterfall;
    Reminded the looker-on of peace opposed to turbulence.
    And illustrated the moral that even the most beautiful things
      of earth must pass away.

Every book you read, every natural object which meets your view, may be
the exercise of memory, be made to furnish food both for reflection and
conversation, enjoyment for your own solitary hours, and the means of
making you popular in society. Believe me, the man who--“saw it, to be
sure, but really forgot what it looked like,” who is met every day in
society, will not be sought after as will the man, who, bringing memory
and fancy happily blended to bear upon what he sees, can make every
object worthy of remark familiar and interesting to those who have not
seen it.

If you have leisure moments, and what man has not? do not consider them
as spare atoms of time to be wasted, idled away in profitless lounging.
Always have a book within your reach, which you may catch up at your odd
minutes. Resolve to edge in a little reading every day, if it is but a
single sentence. If you can give fifteen minutes a day, it will be felt
at the end of the year. Thoughts take up no room. When they are right
they afford a portable pleasure, which one may travel or labor with
without any trouble or incumbrance.

In your intercourse with other men, let every word that falls from your
lips, bear the stamp of perfect truth. No reputation can be more
enviable than that of being known as a man who no consideration could
force to soil his soul with a lie.

“Truth is naturally so acceptable to man, so charming in herself, that
to make falsehood be received, we are compelled to dress it up in the
snow-white robes of Truth; as in passing base coin, it must have the
impress of the good ere it will pass current. Deception, hypocrisy, and
dissimulation, are, when practised, direct compliments to the power of
Truth; and the common custom of passing off Truth’s counterfeit for
herself, is strong testimony in behalf of her intrinsic beauty and
excellence.”

Next to being a man of talent, a well-read man is the most agreeable in
society, and no investment of money or time is so profitable as that
spent in good, useful books, and reading. A good book is a lasting
companion. Truths, which it has taken years to glean, are therein at
once freely but carefully communicated. We enjoy communion with the
mind, though not with the person of the writer. Thus the humblest man
may surround himself by the wisest and best spirits of past and present
ages. No one can be solitary who possesses a book; he owns a friend that
will instruct him in moments of leisure or of necessity. It is only
necessary to turn open the leaves, and the fountain at once gives forth
its streams. You may seek costly furniture for your homes, fanciful
ornaments for your mantel-pieces, and rich carpets for your floors; but,
after the absolute necessaries for a home, give me books as at once the
cheapest, and certainly the most useful and abiding embellishments.

A true gentleman will not only refrain from ridiculing the follies,
ignorance, or infirmities of others, but he will not even allow himself
to smile at them. He will treat the rudest clown with the same easy
courtesy which he would extend to the most polished gentleman, and will
never by word, look, or gesture show that he notices the faults, or
vulgarity of another. _Personal deformity_ is a cross sent by God, and
none but a depraved, wicked, and brutal man could ridicule, or even
greet with a passing smile the unfortunate thus stamped. Even a word or
look of pity will wound the sensitive, but frank, gentle courtesy, the
regard paid by a feeling man to the comfort of a cripple, or that easy
grace which, while it shows no sign of seeing the deformity, shows more
deference to the afflicted one than to the more fortunate, are all duly
appreciated and acknowledged, and win for the man who extends them the
respect and love of all with whom he comes in contact.

Remember that true wit never descends to personalities. When you hear a
man trying to be “funny” at the expense of his friends, or even his
enemies, you may feel sure that his _humor_ is forced, and while it
sinks to ill-nature, cannot rise to the level of true _wit_.

Never try to make yourself out to be a very important person. If you are
so really, your friends will soon find it out, if not, they will not
give you credit for being so, because you try to force your fancied
importance upon them. A pompous fool, though often seen, is not much
loved nor respected, and you may remember that the frog who tried to
make himself as big as an ox, died in the attempt.

A severe wit once said, “If you do not wish to be the mark for
slanderous tongues, be the first to enter a room, and the last to leave
it.”

If you are ever tempted to speak against a woman, think first--“Suppose
she were my sister!” You can never gain anything by bringing your voice
against a woman, even though she may deserve contempt, and your
forbearance may shame others into a similar silence. It is a cowardly
tongue that will take a woman’s name upon it to injure her; though many
men do this, who would fear,--_absolutely be afraid_, to speak against a
man, or that same woman, had she a manly arm to protect her.

I again quote from the celebrated Lord Chesterfield, who says:

“It is good-breeding alone that can prepossess people in your favour at
first sight, more time being necessary to discover greater talents. This
good-breeding, you know, does not consist in low bows and formal
ceremony; but in an easy, civil, and respectful behaviour. You will take
care, therefore, to answer with complaisance, when you are spoken to; to
place yourself at the lower end of the table, unless bid to go higher;
to drink first to the lady of the house, and next to the master; not to
eat awkwardly or dirtily; not to sit when others stand; and to do all
this with an air of complaisance, and not with a grave, sour look, as if
you did it all unwillingly. I do not mean a silly, insipid smile, that
fools have when they would be civil; but an air of sensible good-humor.
I hardly know anything so difficult to attain, or so necessary to
possess, as perfect good-breeding; which is equally inconsistent with a
still formality, and impertinent forwardness, and an awkward
bashfulness. A little ceremony is often necessary; a certain degree of
firmness is absolutely so; and an outward modesty is extremely becoming;
the knowledge of the world, and your own observations, must, and alone
can tell you the proper quantities of each.

“I mentioned the general rules of common civility, which, whoever does
not observe, will pass for a bear, and be as unwelcome as one, in
company; there is hardly any body brutal enough not to answer when they
are spoken to. But it is not enough not to be rude; you should be
extremely civil, and distinguished for your good breeding. The first
principle of this good breeding is never to say anything that you think
can be disagreeable to any body in company; but, on the contrary, you
should endeavor to say what will be agreeable to them; and that in an
easy and natural manner, without seeming to study for compliments. There
is likewise such a thing as a civil look, and a rude look; and you
should look civil, as well as be so; for if, while you are saying a
civil thing, you look gruff and surly, as English bumpkins do, nobody
will be obliged to you for a civility that seemed to come so
unwillingly. If you have occasion to contradict any body, or to set them
right from a mistake, it would be very brutal to say, ‘_That is not so,
I know better_, or _You are out_; but you should say with a civil look,
_I beg your pardon, I believe you mistake_, or, _If I may take the
liberty of contradicting you, I believe it is so and so_; for, though
you may know a thing better than other people, yet it is very shocking
to tell them so directly, without something to soften it; but remember
particularly, that whatever you say or do, with ever so civil an
intention, a great deal consists in the manner and the look, which must
be genteel, easy, and natural, and is easier to be felt than described.

“Civility is particularly due to all women; and remember, that no
provocation whatsoever can justify any man in not being civil to every
woman; and the greatest man would justly be reckoned a brute, if he were
not civil to the meanest woman. It is due to their sex, and is the only
protection they have against the superior strength of ours; nay, even a
little flattery is allowable with women; and a man may, without
meanness, tell a woman that she is either handsomer or wiser than she
is. Observe the French people, and mind how easily and naturally civil
their address is, and how agreeably they insinuate little civilities in
their conversation. They think it so essential, that they call an honest
man and a civil man by the same name, of _honnête homme_; and the Romans
called civility _humanitas_, as thinking it inseparable from humanity.
You cannot begin too early to take that turn, in order to make it
natural and habitual to you.”

Again, speaking of the inconveniency of bashfulness, he says:--

“As for the _mauvaise honte_, I hope you are above it. Your figure is
like other people’s; I suppose you will care that your dress shall be so
too, and to avoid any singularity. What then should you be ashamed of?
and why not go into a mixed company, with as much ease and as little
concern, as you would go into your own room? Vice and ignorance are the
only things I know, which one ought to be ashamed of; keep but clear of
them, and you may go anywhere without fear or concern. I have known some
people, who, from feeling the pain and inconveniences of this _mauvaise
honte_, have rushed into the other extreme, and turned impudent, as
cowards sometimes grow desperate from the excess of danger; but this too
is carefully to be avoided, there being nothing more generally shocking
than impudence. The medium between these two extremes marks out the
well-bred man; he feels himself firm and easy in all companies; is
modest without being bashful, and steady without being impudent; if he
is a stranger, he observes, with care, the manners and ways of the
people most esteemed at that place, and conforms to them with
complaisance.”

Flattery is always in bad taste. If you say more in a person’s praise
than is deserved, you not only say what is _false_, but you make others
doubt the wisdom of your judgment. Open, palpable flattery will be
regarded by those to whom it is addressed as an insult. In your
intercourse with ladies, you will find that the delicate compliment of
seeking their society, showing your pleasure in it, and choosing for
subjects of conversation, other themes than the weather, dress, or the
opera, will be more appreciated by women of sense, than the more awkward
compliment of open words or gestures of admiration.

Never imitate the eccentricities of other men, even though those men
have the highest genius to excuse their oddities. Eccentricity is, at
the best, in bad taste; but an imitation of it--second hand oddity--is
detestable.

Never feign abstraction in society. If you have matters of importance
which really occupy your mind, and prevent you from paying attention to
the proper etiquette of society, stay at home till your mind is less
preoccupied. Chesterfield says:--

“What is commonly called an absent man, is commonly either a very weak,
or a very affected man; but be he which he will, he is, I am sure, a
very disagreeable man in company. He fails in all the common offices of
civility; he seems not to know those people to-day, whom yesterday he
appeared to live in intimacy with. He takes no part in the general
conversation; but, on the contrary, breaks into it from time to time,
with some start of his own, as if he waked from a dream. This (as I said
before) is a sure indication, either of a mind so weak that it is not
able to bear above one object at a time; or so affected, that it would
be supposed to be wholly engrossed by, and directed to, some very great
and important objects. Sir Isaac Newton, Mr. Locke, and (it may be) five
or six more, since the creation of the world, may have had a right to
absence, from that intense thought which the things they were
investigating required. But if a young man, and a man of the world, who
has no such avocations to plead, will claim and exercise that right of
absence in company, his pretended right should, in my mind, be turned
into an involuntary absence, by his perpetual exclusion out of company.
However frivolous a company may be, still, while you are among them, do
not show them, by your inattention, that you think them so; but rather
take their tone, and conform, in some degree, to their weakness, instead
of manifesting your contempt for them. There is nothing that people
bear more impatiently, or forgive less, than contempt; and an injury is
much sooner forgotten than an insult. If, therefore, you would rather
please than offend, rather be well than ill-spoken of, rather be loved
than hated; remember to have that constant attention about you, which
flatters every man’s little vanity; and the want of which, by mortifying
his pride, never fails to excite his resentment, or, at least, his ill
will. For instance: most people (I might say all people) have their
weaknesses; they have their aversions and their likings to such or such
things; so that, if you were to laugh at a man for his aversion to a
cat, or cheese, (which are common antipathies,) or, by inattention and
negligence, to let them come in his way, where you could prevent it, he
would, in the first case, think himself insulted, and, in the second,
slighted, and would remember both. Whereas your care to procure for him
what he likes, and to remove from him what he hates, shows him that he
is, at least, an object of your attention; flatters his vanity, and
makes him, possibly, more your friend than a more important service
would have done. With regard to women, attentions still below these are
necessary, and, by the custom of the world, in some measure due,
according to the laws of good breeding.”

In giving an entertainment to your friends, while you avoid extravagant
expenditure, it is your duty to place before them the best your purse
will permit you to purchase, and be sure you have plenty. Abundance
without superfluity, and good quality without extravagance, are your
best rules for an entertainment.

If, by the introduction of a friend, by a mistake, or in any other way,
your enemy, or a man to whom you have the strongest personal dislike, is
under your roof, or at your table, as a guest, hospitality and good
breeding both require you to treat him with the same frank courtesy
which you extend to your other guests; though you need make no violent
protestations of friendship, and are not required to make any advances
towards him after he ceases to be your guest.

In giving a dinner party, invite only as many guests as you can seat
comfortably at your table. If you have two tables, have them precisely
alike, or, rest assured, you will offend those friends whom you place at
what they judge to be the inferior table. Above all, avoid having little
tables placed in the corners of the room, when there is a large table.
At some houses in Paris it is a fashion to set the dining room entirely
with small tables, which will accommodate comfortably three or four
people, and such parties are very merry, very sociable and pleasant, if
four congenial people are around each table; but it is a very dull
fashion, if you are not sure of the congeniality of each quartette of
guests.

If you lose your fortune or position in society, it is wiser to retire
from the world of fashion than to wait for that world to bow you out.

If you are poor, but welcome in society on account of your family or
talents, avoid the error which the young are most apt to fall into, that
of living beyond your means.

The advice of Polonius to Laertes is as excellent in the present day, as
it was in Shakespeare’s time:--

                  “Give thy thoughts no tongue,
    Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
    Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
    The friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
    Grapple them to thy soul with hooks of steel:
    But do not dull thy palm with entertainments
    Of each new hatch’d, unfledg’d comrade. Beware
    Of entrance to a quarrel: but, being in,
    Bear it that the opposer may beware of thee.
    Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice;
    Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment.
    Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
    But not express’d in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
    For the apparel oft proclaims the man.

           *       *       *       *       *

    Neither a borrower nor a lender be:
    For loan oft loses both itself and friend;
    And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
    This above all,--To thine ownself be true;
    And it must follow, as the night the day,
    Thou canst not then be false to any man.”

It is by no means desirable to be always engaged in the serious pursuits
of life. Take time for pleasure, and you will find your work progresses
faster for some recreation. Lord Chesterfield says:

“I do not regret the time that I passed in pleasures; they were
seasonable; they were the pleasures of youth, and I enjoyed them while
young. If I had not, I should probably have overvalued them now, as we
are very apt to do what we do not know; but knowing them as I do, I know
their real value, and how much they are generally overrated. Nor do I
regret the time that I have passed in business, for the same reason;
those who see only the outside of it, imagine it has hidden charms,
which they pant after; and nothing but acquaintance can undeceive them.
I, who have been behind the scenes, both of pleasure and business, and
have seen all the springs and pullies of those decorations which
astonish and dazzle the audience, retire, not only without regret, but
with contentment and satisfaction. But what I do, and ever shall regret,
is the time which, while young, I lost in mere idleness, and in doing
nothing. This is the common effect of the inconsideracy of youth,
against which I beg you will be most carefully upon your guard. The
value of moments, when cast up, is immense, if well employed; if thrown
away, their loss is irrecoverable. Every moment may be put to some use,
and that with much more pleasure than if unemployed. Do not imagine that
by the employment of time, I mean an uninterrupted application to
serious studies. No; pleasures are, at proper times, both as necessary
and as useful; they fashion and form you for the world; they teach you
characters, and show you the human heart in its unguarded minutes. But
then remember to make that use of them. I have known many people, from
laziness of mind, go through both pleasure and business with equal
inattention; neither enjoying the one nor doing the other; thinking
themselves men of pleasure, because they were mingled with those who
were, and men of business, because they had business to do, though they
did not do it. Whatever you do, do it to the purpose; do it thoroughly,
not superficially. _Approfondissez_: go to the bottom of things.
Anything half done or half known, is, in my mind, neither done nor
known at all. Nay worse, it often misleads. There is hardly any place or
any company where you may not gain knowledge, if you please; almost
every body knows some one thing, and is glad to talk upon that one
thing. Seek and you will find, in this world as well as in the next. See
everything; inquire into everything; and you may excuse your curiosity,
and the questions you ask, which otherwise might be thought impertinent,
by your manner of asking them; for most things depend a great deal upon
the manner. As, for example, I _am afraid that I am very troublesome
with my questions; but nobody can inform me so well as you_; or
something of that kind.”

The same author, speaking of the evils of pedantry, says:--

“Every excellency, and every virtue has its kindred vice or weakness;
and, if carried beyond certain bounds, sinks into one or the other.
Generosity often runs into profusion, economy into avarice, courage into
rashness, caution into timidity, and so on:--insomuch that, I believe,
there is more judgment required for the proper conduct of our virtues,
than for avoiding their opposite vices. Vice, in its true light, is so
deformed, that it shocks us at first sight, and would hardly ever seduce
us, if it did not at first wear the mask of some virtue. But virtue is,
in itself, so beautiful, that it charms us at first sight; engages us
more and more upon further acquaintance; and, as with other beauties, we
think excess impossible, it is here that judgment is necessary, to
moderate and direct the effects of an excellent cause. I shall apply
this reasoning, at present, not to any particular virtue, but to an
excellency, which, for want of judgment, is often the cause of
ridiculous and blameable effects; I mean great learning; which, if not
accompanied with sound judgment, frequently carries us into error,
pride, and pedantry. As, I hope, you will possess that excellency in its
utmost extent, and yet without its too common failings, the hints, which
my experience can suggest, may probably not be useless to you.

“Some learned men, proud of their knowledge, only speak to decide, and
give judgment without appeal; the consequence of which is, that mankind,
provoked by the insult, and injured by the oppression, revolt; and, in
order to shake off the tyranny, even call the lawful authority in
question. The more you know, the modester you should be; and (by the
bye) that modesty is the surest way of gratifying your vanity. Even
where you are sure, seem rather doubtful; represent, but do not
pronounce; and, if you would convince others, seem open to conviction
yourself.

“Others, to show their learning, or often from the prejudices of a
school education, where they hear of nothing else, are always talking of
the ancients, as something more than men, and of the moderns, as
something less. They are never without a classic or two in their
pockets; they stick to the old good sense; they read none of the modern
trash; and will show you plainly that no improvement has been made in
any one art or science these last seventeen hundred years. I would, by
no means, have you disown your acquaintance with the ancients; but still
less would I have you brag of an exclusive intimacy with them. Speak of
the moderns without contempt, and of the ancients without idolatry;
judge them all by their merits, but not by their ages; and if you happen
to have an Elzevir classic in your pocket, neither show it nor mention
it.

“Some great scholars, most absurdly, draw all their maxims, both for
public and private life, from what they call parallel cases in the
ancient authors; without considering that, in the first place, there
never were, since the creation of the world, two cases exactly parallel;
and, in the next place, that there never was a case stated, or even
known, by any historian, with every one of its circumstances; which,
however, ought to be known in order to be reasoned from. Reason upon the
case itself, and the several circumstances that attend it, and act
accordingly; but not from the authority of ancient poets or historians.
Take into your consideration, if you please, cases seemingly analogous;
but take them as helps only, not as guides.

“There is another species of learned men who, though less dogmatical and
supercilious, are not less impertinent. These are the communicative and
shining pedants, who adorn their conversation, even with women, by happy
quotations of Greek and Latin; and who have contracted such a
familiarity with the Greek and Roman authors, that they call them by
certain names or epithets denoting intimacy. As, _old_ Homer; that _sly
rogue_ Horace; _Maro_, instead of Virgil; and _Naso_, instead of Ovid.
These are often imitated by coxcombs who have no learning at all, but
who have got some names and some scraps of ancient authors by heart,
which they improperly and impertinently retail in all companies, in
hopes of passing for scholars. If, therefore, you would avoid the
accusation of pedantry on one hand, or the suspicion of ignorance on the
other, abstain from learned ostentation. Speak the language of the
company that you are in; speak it purely, and unlarded with any other.
Never seem wiser nor more learned than the people you are with. Wear
your learning, like your watch, in a private pocket; and do not pull it
out and strike it, merely to show that you have one. If you are asked
what o’clock it is, tell it, but do not proclaim it hourly and unasked,
like the watchman.

“Upon the whole, remember that learning (I mean Greek and Roman
learning) is a most useful and necessary ornament, which it is shameful
not to be master of; but, at the same time, most carefully avoid those
errors and abuses which I have mentioned, and which too often attend it.
Remember, too, that great modern knowledge is still more necessary than
ancient; and that you had better know perfectly the present, than the
old state of the world; though I would have you well acquainted with
both.”

If you are poor, you must deprive yourself often of the pleasure of
escorting ladies to ride, the opera, or other entertainments, because it
is understood in society that, in these cases, a gentleman pays all the
expenses for both, and in any emergency you may find your bill for
carriage hire, suppers, bouquets, or other unforeseen demands, greater
than you anticipated.

Shun the card table. Even the friendly games common in society, for
small stakes, are best avoided. They feed the love of gambling, and you
will find that this love, if once acquired, is the hardest curse to get
rid of.

It is in bad taste, though often done, to turn over the cards on a
table, when you are calling. If your host or hostess finds you so doing,
it may lead them to suppose you value them more for their acquaintances
than themselves.




----------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcriber’s Note:


Inconsistencies in accents (e.g. tete a tete vs. tête à tête) and
hyphenation (e.g. ball room vs. ball-room) have not been corrected.
Variant spellings have also been retained.

Minor typographical errors (e.g. missing punctuation, incorrect or
duplicate letters) have been corrected without note.

The following changes were also made to the text:

p. 130: missing ‘at’ added (too lazy to part it at all)

p. 255: two asterisks changed to ellipsis (before he begins any
other....)

p. 266: italics added to ‘I’ and removed from ‘or’ ( _I have the honor
to acquaint you_; _Permit me to assure you_; or,)

p. 292: italics removed from ‘of’ (_largesse_ of)

p. 332: off to of (get rid of)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gentlemen's Book of Etiquette and
Manual of Politeness, by Cecil B. Hartley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOOK OF ETIQUETTE ***

***** This file should be named 39293-0.txt or 39293-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/9/39293/

Produced by Julia Miller, S.D., and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great House, by Stanley J. Weyman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Great House

Author: Stanley J. Weyman

Release Date: March 28, 2012 [EBook #39294]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT HOUSE ***




Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (University of Michigan)











Transcriber's Notes:

   1. Page scan source:
      http://www.archive.org/details/greathouseastor00weymgoog
      (University of Michigan)

   2. The diphthong oe is represented by [oe].






                           THE GREAT HOUSE






                          BY THE SAME AUTHOR

       THE HOUSE OF THE WOLF
       THE NEW RECTOR
       THE STORY OF FRANCIS CLUDDE
       A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE
       THE MAN IN BLACK
       UNDER THE RED ROBE
       MY LADY ROTHA
       MEMOIRS OF A MINISTER OF FRANCE
       THE RED COCKADE
       SHREWSBURY
       THE CASTLE INN
       SOPHIA
       COUNT HANNIBAL
       IN KINGS' BYWAYS
       THE LONG NIGHT
       THE ABBESS OF VLAYE
       STARVECROW FARM
       CHIPPINGE
       LAID UP IN LAVENDER
       THE WILD GEESE






                           THE GREAT HOUSE




                                  BY

                          STANLEY J. WEYMAN

               Author of "The Castle Inn," "Chippinge,"
                 "A Gentleman of France," etc., etc.





                               NEW YORK
                       LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.
                    FOURTH AVENUE AND 30th STREET
                                 1919






                           Copyright, 1919
                                  BY
                          STANLEY J. WEYMAN






                               CONTENTS


   CHAPTER

         I. The Hôtel Lambert--Upstairs.

        II. The Hôtel Lambert--Downstairs.

       III. The Lawyer Abroad.

        IV. Homeward Bound.

         V. The London Packet.

        VI. Field and Forge.

       VII. Mr. John Audley.

      VIII. The Gatehouse.

        IX. Old Things.

         X. New Things.

        XI. Tact and Temper.

       XII. The Yew Walk.

      XIII. Peter Pauper.

       XIV. The Manchester Men.

        XV. Strange Bedfellows.

       XVI. The Great House at Beaudelays.

      XVII. To the Rescue.

     XVIII. Masks and Faces.

       XIX. The Corn Law Crisis.

        XX. Peter's Return.

       XXI. Toft at the Butterflies.

      XXII. My Lord Speaks.

     XXIII. Blore Under Weaver.

      XXIV. An Agent of the Old School.

       XXV. Mary is Lonely.

      XXVI. Missing.

     XXVII. A Footstep in the Hall.

    XXVIII. The News from Riddsley.

      XXIX. The Audley Bible.

       XXX. A Friend in Need.

      XXXI. Ben Bosham.

     XXXII. Mary Makes a Discovery.

    XXXIII. The Meeting at the Maypole.

     XXXIV. By the Canal.

      XXXV. My Lord Speaks Out.

     XXXVI. The Riddsley Election.

    XXXVII. A Turn of the Wheel.

   XXXVIII. Toft's Little Surprise.

     XXXIX. The Deed of Renunciation.

        XL. "Let Us Make Others Thankful."






                           THE GREAT HOUSE




                              CHAPTER I

                     THE HÔTEL LAMBERT--UPSTAIRS


On an evening in March in the 'forties of last century a girl looked
down on the Seine from an attic window on the Ile St. Louis. The
room behind her--or beside her, for she sat on the window-ledge, with
her back against one side of the opening and her feet against the
other--was long, whitewashed from floor to ceiling, lighted by five
gaunt windows, and as cold to the eye as charity to the recipient.
Along each side of the chamber ran ten pallet beds. A black door broke
the wall at one end, and above the door hung a crucifix. A painting of
a Station of the Cross adorned the wall at the other end. Beyond this
picture the room had no ornament; it is almost true to say that beyond
what has been named it had no furniture. One bed--the bed beside the
window at which the girl sat--was screened by a thin curtain which did
not reach the floor. This was her bed.

But in early spring no window in Paris looked on a scene more cheerful
than this window; which as from an eyrie commanded a shining reach of
the Seine bordered by the lawns and foliage of the King's Garden, and
closed by the graceful arches of the Bridge of Austerlitz. On the
water boats shot to and fro. The quays were gay with the red trousers
of soldiers and the coquettish caps of soubrettes, with students in
strange cloaks, and the twin kling wheels of yellow cabriolets. The
first swallows were hawking hither and thither above the water, and a
pleasant hum rose from the Boulevard Bourdon.

Yet the girl sighed. For it was her birthday, she was twenty this
twenty-fifth of March, and there was not a soul in the world to know
this and to wish her joy. A life of dependence, toned to the key of
the whitewashed room and the thin pallets, lay before her; and though
she had good reason to be thankful for the safety which dependence
bought, still she was only twenty, and springtime, viewed from prison
windows, beckons to its cousin, youth. She saw family groups walking
the quays, and father, mother, children, all, seen from a distance,
were happy. She saw lovers loitering in the garden or pacing to and
fro, and romance walked with every one of them; none came late, or
fell to words. She sighed more deeply; and on the sound the door
opened.

"_Hola!_" cried a shrill voice, speaking in French, fluent, but oddly
accented. "Who is here? The Princess desires that the English
Mademoiselle will descend this evening."

"Very good," the girl in the window replied pleasantly. "At the same
hour, Joséphine?"

"Why not, Mademoiselle?" A trim maid, with a plain face and the
faultless figure of a Pole, came a few steps into the room. "But you
are alone?"

"The children are walking. I stayed at home."

"To be alone? As if I did not understand that! To be alone--it is the
luxury of the rich."

The girl nodded. "None but a Pole would have thought of that," she
said.

"Ah, the crafty English Miss!" the maid retorted. "How she flatters!
Perhaps she needs a touch of the tongs to-night? Or the loan of a pair
of red-heeled shoes, worn no more than thrice by the Princess--and
with the black which is convenable for Mademoiselle, oh, so neat! Of
the _ancien régime_, absolutely!"

The other laughed. "The _ancien régime_, Joséphine--and this!" she
replied, with a gesture that embraced the room, the pallets, her own
bed. "A curled head--and this! You are truly a cabbage----"

"But Mademoiselle descends!"

"A cabbage of--foolishness!"

"Ah, well, if I descended, you would see," the maid retorted. "I am
but the Princess's second maid, and I know nothing! But if I descended
it would not be to this dormitory I should return! Nor to the
tartines! Nor to the daughters of Poland! Trust me for that--and I
know but my prayers. While Mademoiselle, she is an artist's daughter."

"There spoke the Pole again," the girl struck in with a smile.

"The English Miss knows how to flatter," Joséphine laughed. "That is
one for the touch of the tongs," she continued, ticking them off on
her fingers. "And one for the red-heeled shoes. And--but no more! Let
me begone before I am bankrupt!" She turned about with a flirt of her
short petticoats, but paused and looked back, with her hand on the
door. "None the less, mark you well, Mademoiselle, from the whitewash
to the ceiling of Lebrun, from the dortoir of the Jeunes Filles to the
Gallery of Hercules, there are but twenty stairs, and easy, oh, so
easy to descend! If Mademoiselle instead of flattering Joséphine, the
Cracovienne, flattered some pretty gentleman--who knows? Not I! I know
but my prayers!" And with a light laugh the maid clapped to the door
and was gone.

The girl in the window had not throughout the parley changed her pose
or moved more than her head, and this was characteristic of her. For
even in her playfulness there was gravity, and a measure of stillness.
Now, left alone, she dropped her feet to the floor, turned, and knelt
on the sill with her brow pressed against the glass. The sun had set,
mists were rising from the river, the quays were gray and cold. Here
and there a lamp began to shine through the twilight. But the girl's
thoughts were no longer on the scene beneath her eyes.

"There goes the third who has been good to me," she pondered. "First
the Polish lodger who lived on the floor below, and saved me from that
woman. Then the Princess's daughter. Now Joséphine. There are still
kind people in the world--God grant that I may not forget it! But how
much better to give than to take, to be strong than to be weak, to be
the mistress and not the puppet of fortune! How much better--and, were
I a man, how easy!"

But on that there came into her remembrance one to whom it had not
been easy, one who had signally failed to master fortune, or to
grapple with circumstances. "Poor father!" she whispered.




                              CHAPTER II

                    THE HÔTEL LAMBERT--DOWNSTAIRS


When ladies were at home to their intimates in the Paris of the
'forties, they seated their guests about large round tables with a
view to that common exchange of wit and fancy which is the French
ideal. The mode crossed to England, and in many houses these round
tables, fallen to the uses of the dining-room or the nursery, may
still be seen. But when the Princess Czartoriski entertained in the
Hôtel Lambert, under the ceiling painted by Lebrun, which had looked
down on the arm-chair of Madame de Châtelet and the tabouret of
Voltaire, she was, as became a Pole, a law to herself. In that
beautiful room, softly lit by wax candles, her guests were free to
follow their bent, to fall into groups, or to admire at their ease the
Watteaus and Bouchers which the Princess's father-in-law, old Prince
Adam, had restored to their native panels.

Thanks to his taste and under her rule the gallery of Hercules
presented on this evening a scene not unworthy of its past. The
silks and satins of the old régime were indeed replaced by the
high-shouldered coats, the stocks, the pins and velvet vests of the
dandies; and Thiers beaming through his glasses, or Lamartine, though
beauty, melted by the woes of Poland, hung upon his lips, might have
been thought by some unequal to the dead. But they were now what those
had been; and the women peacocked it as of old. At any rate the effect
was good, and a guest who came late, and paused a moment on the
threshold to observe the scene, thought that he had never before done
the room full justice. Presently the Princess saw him and he went
forward. The man who was talking to her made his bow, and she pointed
with her fan to the vacant place. "Felicitations, my lord," she said.
She held out her gloved hand.

"A thousands thanks," he said, as he bent over it. "But on what,
Princess?"

"On the success of a friend. On what we have all seen in the
_Journal_. Is it not true that you have won your suit?"

"I won, yes." He shrugged his shoulders. "But what, Madame? A bare
title, an empty rent-roll."

"For shame!" she answered. "But I suppose that this is your English
phlegm. Is it not a thing to be proud of--an old title? That which
money cannot buy and the wisest would fain wear? M. Guizot, what would
he not give to be Chien de Race? Your Peel, also?"

"And your Thiers?" he returned, with a sly glance at the little man in
the shining glasses.

"He, too! But he has the passion of humanity, which is a title in
itself. Whereas you English, turning in your unending circle, one out,
one in, one in, one out, are but playing a game--marking time! You
have not a desire to go forward!"

"Surely, Princess, you forget our Reform Bill, scarce ten years old."

"Which bought off your cotton lords and your fat bourgeois, and left
the people without leaders and more helpless than before. No, my lord,
if your Russell--Lord John, do you call him?--had one jot of M.
Thiers' enthusiasm! Or your Peel--but I look for nothing there!"

He shrugged his shoulders. "I admit," he said, "that M. Thiers has an
enthusiasm beyond the ordinary."

"You do? Wonderful!"

"But," with a smile, "it is, I fancy, an enthusiasm of which the
object is--M. Thiers!"

"Ah!" she cried, fanning herself more quickly. "Now there spoke not
Mr. Audley, the attaché--he had not been so imprudent! But--how do you
call yourself now?"

"On days of ceremony," he replied, "Lord Audley of Beaudelays."

"There spoke my lord, unattached! Oh, you English, you have no
enthusiasm. You have only traditions. Poor were Poland if her fate
hung on you!"

"There are still bright spots," he said slyly. And his glance returned
to the little statesman in spectacles on whom the Princess rested the
hopes of Poland.

"No!" she cried vividly. "Don't say it again or I shall be displeased.
Turn your eyes elsewhere. There is one here about whom I wish to
consult you. Do you see the tall girl in black who is engaged with the
miniatures?"

"I saw her some time ago."

"I suppose so. You are a man. I dare say you would call her handsome?"

"I think it possible, were she not in this company. What of her,
Princess?"

"Do you notice anything beyond her looks?"

"The picture is plain--for the frame in which I see her. Is she one of
the staff of your school?"

"Yes, but with an air----"

"Certainly--an air!" He nodded.

"Well, she is a countrywoman of yours and has a history. Her father, a
journalist, artist, no matter what, came to live in Paris years ago.
He went down, down, always down; six months ago he died. There was
enough to bury him, no more. She says, I don't know"--the Princess
indicated doubt with a movement of her fan--"that she wrote to friends
in England. Perhaps she did not write; how do I know? She was at the
last sou, the street before her, a hag of a concierge behind, and
withal--as you see her."

"Not wearing that dress, I presume?" he said with a faint smile.

"No. She had passed everything to the Mont de Piété; she had what she
stood up in--yet herself! Then a Polish family on the floor below, to
whom my daughter carried alms, told Cécile of her. They pitied her,
spoke well of her, she had done--no matter what for them--perhaps
nothing. Probably nothing. But Cécile ascended, saw her, became
enamoured, _enragée!_ You know Cécile--for her all that wears feathers
is of the angels! Nothing would do but she must bring her here and set
her to teach English to the daughters during her own absence."

"The Princess is away?"

"For four weeks. But in three days she returns, and you see where I
am. How do I know who this is? She may be this, or that. If she were
French, if she were Polish, I should know! But she is English and of a
calm, a reticence--ah!"

"And of a pride too," he replied thoughtfully, "if I mistake not. Yet
it is a good face, Princess."

She fluttered her fan. "It is a handsome one. For a man that is the
same."

"With all this you permit her to appear?"

"To be of use. And a little that she may be seen by some English
friend, who may tell me."

"Shall I talk to her?"

"If you will be so good. Learn, if you please, what she is."

"Your wishes are law," he rejoined. "Will you present me?"

"It is not necessary," the Princess answered. She beckoned to a stout
gentleman who wore whiskers trimmed à la mode du Roi, and had laurel
leaves on his coat collar. "A thousand thanks."

He lingered a moment to take part in the Princess's reception of the
Academician. Then he joined a group about old Prince Adam Czartoriski,
who was describing a recent visit to Cracow, that last morsel of free
Poland, soon to pass into the maw of Austria. A little apart, the girl
in black bent over the case of miniatures, comparing some with a list,
and polishing others with a square of silk. Presently he found himself
beside her. Their eyes met.

"I am told," he said, bowing, "that you are my countrywoman. The
Princess thought that I might be of use to you."

The girl had read his errand before he spoke and a shade flitted
across her face. She knew, only too well, that her hold on this rock
of safety to which chance had lifted her--out of a gulf of peril and
misery of which she trembled to think--was of the slightest. Early,
almost from the first, she had discovered that the Princess's
benevolence found vent rather in schemes for the good of many than in
tenderness for one. But hitherto she had relied on the daughter's
affection, and a little on her own usefulness. Then, too, she was
young and hopeful, and the depths from which she had escaped were such
that she could not believe that Providence would return her to them.

But she was quick-witted, and his opening frightened her. She guessed
at once that she was not to be allowed to await Cécile's return, that
her fate hung on what this Englishman, so big and bland and forceful,
reported of her.

She braced herself to meet the danger. "I am obliged to the Princess,"
she said. "But my ties with England are slight. I came to France with
my father when I was ten years old."

"I think you lost him recently?" He found his task less easy than it
should have been.

"He died six months ago," she replied, regarding him gravely. "His
illness left me without means. I was penniless, when the young
Princess befriended me and gave me a respite here. I am no part of
this," with a glance at the salon and the groups about them. "I teach
upstairs. I am thankful for the privilege of doing so."

"The Princess told me as much," he said frankly. "She thought that,
being English, I might advise you better than she could; that possibly
I might put you in touch with your relations?"

She shook her head.

"Or your friends? You must have friends?"

"Doubtless my father had--once," she said in a low voice. "But as his
means diminished, he saw less and less of those who had known him. For
the last two years I do not think that he saw an Englishman at home.
Before that time I was in a convent school, and I do not know."

"You are a Roman Catholic, then?"

"No. And for that reason--and for another, that my account was not
paid"--her color rose painfully to her face--"I could not apply to the
Sisters. I am very frank," she added, her lip trembling.

"And I encroach," he answered, bowing. "Forgive me! Your father was an
artist, I believe?"

"He drew for an Atelier de Porcelaine--for the journals when he could.
But he was not very successful," she continued reluctantly. "The china
factory which had employed him since he came to Paris, failed. When I
returned from school he was alone and poor, living in the little
street in the Quartier, where he died."

"But forgive me, you must have some relations in England?"

"Only one of whom I know," she replied. "My father's brother. My
father had quarrelled with him--bitterly, I fear; but when he was
dying he bade me write to my uncle and tell him how we were placed. I
did so. No answer came. Then after my father's death I wrote again. I
told my uncle that I was alone, that I was without money, that in a
short time I should be homeless, that if I could return to England I
could live by teaching French. He did not reply. I could do no more."

"That was outrageous," he answered, flushing darkly. Though well under
thirty he was a tall man and portly, with one of those large faces
that easily become injected. "Do you know--is your uncle also in
narrow circumstances?"

"I know no more than his name," she said. "My father never spoke of
him. They had quarrelled. Indeed, my father spoke little of his past."

"But when you did not hear from your uncle, did you not tell your
father?"

"It could do no good," she said. "And he was dying."

He was not sentimental, this big man, whose entrance into a room
carried with it a sense of power. Nor was he one to be lightly moved,
but her simplicity and the picture her words drew for him of the
daughter and the dying man touched him. Already his mind was made up
that the Czartoriski should not turn her adrift for lack of a word.
Aloud, "The Princess did not tell me your name," he said. "May I know
it?"

"Audley," she said. "Mary Audley."

He stared at her. She supposed that he had not caught the name. She
repeated it.

"Audley? Do you really mean that?"

"Why not?" she asked, surprised in her turn. "Is it so uncommon a
name?"

"No," he replied slowly. "No, but it is a coincidence. The Princess
did not tell me that your name was Audley."

The girl shook her head. "I doubt if she knows," she said. "To her I
am only 'the English girl.'"

"And your father was an artist, resident in Paris? And his name?"

"Peter Audley."

He nodded. "Peter Audley," he repeated. His eyes looked through her at
something far away. His lips were more firmly set. His face was grave.
"Peter Audley," he repeated softly. "An artist resident in Paris!"

"But did you know him?" she cried.

He brought his thoughts and his eyes back to her. "No, I did not know
him," he said. "But I have heard of him." And again it was plain that
his thoughts took wing. "John Audley's brother, the artist!" he
muttered.

In her impatience she could have taken him by the sleeve and shaken
him. "Then you do know John Audley?" she said. "My uncle?"

Again he brought himself back with an effort. "A thousand pardons!" he
said. "You see the Princess did not tell me that you were an Audley.
Yes, I know John Audley--of the Gatehouse. I suppose it was to him you
wrote?"

"Yes."

"And he did not reply?"

She nodded.

He laughed, as at something whimsical. It was not a kindly laugh, it
jarred a little on his listener. But the next moment his face
softened, he smiled at her, and the smile of such a man had its
importance, for in repose his eyes were hard. It was clear to her that
he was a man of position, that he belonged of right to this keen
polished world at which she was stealing a glance. His air was
distinguished, and his dress, though quiet, struck the last note of
fashion.

"But I am keeping you in suspense," he said. "I must tell you, Miss
Audley, why it surprised me to learn your name. Because I, too, am an
Audley."

"You!" she cried.

"Yes, I," he replied. "What is more, I am akin to you. The kinship is
remote, but it happens that your father's name, in its place in a
pedigree, has been familiar to me of late, and I could set down the
precise degree of cousinship in which you stand to me. I think your
father was my fourth cousin."

She colored charmingly. "Is it possible?" she exclaimed.

"It is a fact, proved indeed, recently, in a court of law," he
answered lightly. "Perhaps it is as well that we have that warrant for
a conversation which I can see that the Princess thinks long. After
this she will expect to hear the whole of your history."

"I fear that she may be displeased," the girl said, wincing a little.
"You have been very kind----"

"Who should be kind," he replied, "if not the head of your family? But
have no fear, I will deal with the Princess. I shall be able to
satisfy her, I have no doubt."

"And you"--she looked at him with appeal in her eyes--"will you be
good enough to tell me who you are?"

"I am Lord Audley. To distinguish me from another of the same name, I
am called Audley of Beaudelays."

"Of Beaudelays?" she repeated. He thought her face, her whole bearing,
singularly composed in view of his announcement. "Beaudelays?" she
repeated thoughtfully. "I have heard the name more than once. Perhaps
from my father."

"It were odd if you had not," he said. "It is the name of my house,
and your uncle, John Audley, lives within a mile of it."

"Oh," she said. The name of the uncle who had ignored her appeals fell
on her like a cold douche.

"I will not say more now," Lord Audley continued. "But you shall hear
from me. To--morrow I quit Paris for three or four days, but when I
return have no fear. You may leave the matter in my hands in full
confidence that I shall not fail--my cousin."

He held out his hand and she laid hers in it. She looked him frankly
in the face. "Thank you," she said. "I little thought when I descended
this evening that I should meet a kinsman."

"And a friend," he answered, holding her hand a little longer than was
needful.

"And a friend," she repeated. "But there--I must go now. I should have
disappeared ten minutes ago. This is my way." She inclined her head,
and turning from him she pushed open a small door masked by a picture.
She passed at once into a dark corridor, and threading its windings
gained the great staircase.

As she flitted upwards from floor to floor, skirting a long procession
of shadowy forms, and now ogled by a Leda whose only veil was the
dusk, now threatened by the tusks of the great boar at bay, she
was not conscious of thought or surprise. It was not until she had
lighted her taper outside the dormitory door, and, passing between the
rows of sleeping children, had gained her screened corner, that she
found it possible to think. Then she set the light in her tiny
washing-basin--such was the rule--and seated herself on her bed. For
some minutes she stared before her, motionless and unwinking, her
hands clasped about her knees, her mind at work.

Was it true, or a dream? Had this really happened to her since she had
viewed herself in the blurred mirror, had set a curl right and,
satisfied, had turned to go down? The danger and the delivery from it,
the fear and the friend in need? Or was it a Cinderella's treat, which
no fairy godmother would recall to her, with which no lost slipper
would connect her? She could almost believe this. For no Cinderella,
in the ashes of the hearth, could have seemed more remote from the gay
ball-room than she crouching on her thin mattress, with the breathing
of the children in her ears, from the luxury of the famous salon.

Or, if it was true, if it had happened, would anything come of it?
Would Lord Audley remember her? Or would he think no more of her,
ignoring to-morrow the poor relation whom it had been the whim of the
moment to own? That would be cruel! That would be base! But if Mary
had fallen in with some good people since her father's death, she had
also met many callous, and a few cruel people. He might be one. And
then, how strange it was that her father had never named this great
kinsman, never referred to him, never even, when dying, disclosed his
name!

The light wavered in the draught that stole through the bald, undraped
window. A child whimpered in its sleep, awoke, began to sob. It was
the youngest of the daughters of Poland. The girl rose, and going on
tip-toe to the child, bent over it, kissed it, warmed it in her bosom,
soothed it. Presently the little waif slept again, and Mary Audley
began to make ready for bed.

But so much turned for her on what had happened, so much hung in the
balance, that it was not unnatural that as she let down her hair and
plaited it in two long tails for the night, she should see her new
kinsman's face in the mirror. Nor strange that as she lay sleepless
and thought-ridden in her bed the same face should present itself anew
relieved against the background of darkness.




                             CHAPTER III

                          THE LAWYER ABROAD


Half an hour later Lord Audley paused in the hall at Meurice's, and
having given his cloak and hat to a servant went thoughtfully up the
wide staircase. He opened the door of a room on the first floor. A
stout man with a bald head, who had been for some time yawning over
the dying fire, rose to his feet and remained standing.

Audley nodded. "Hallo, Stubbs!" he said carelessly, "not in bed yet?"

"No, my lord," the other answered. "I waited to learn if your lordship
had any orders for England."

"Well, sit down now. I've something to tell you." My lord stooped as
he spoke and warmed his hands at the embers; then rising, he stood
with his back to the hearth. The stout man sat forward on his
chair with an air of deference. His double chin rested on the ample
folds of a soft white stock secured by a gold pin in the shape of a
wheat-sheaf. He wore black knee-breeches and stockings, and his dress,
though plain, bore the stamp of neatness and prosperity.

For a minute or two Audley continued to look thoughtfully before him.
At length, "May I take it that this claim is really at an end now?" he
said. "Is the decision final, I mean?"

"Unless new evidence crops up," Stubbs answered--he was a lawyer--"the
decision is certainly final. With your lordship's signature to the
papers I brought over----"

"But the claimant might try again?"

"Mr. John Audley might do anything," Stubbs returned. "I believe him
to be mad upon the point, and therefore capable of much. But he could
only move on new evidence of the most cogent nature. I do not believe
that such evidence exists."

His employer weighed this for some time. At length, "Then if you were
in my place," he said, "you would not be tempted to hedge?"

"To hedge?" the lawyer exclaimed, as if he had never heard the word
before. "I am afraid I don't understand."

"I will explain. But first, tell me this. If anything happens to me
before I have a child, John Audley succeeds to the peerage? That is
clear?"

"Certainly! Mr. John Audley, the claimant, is also your heir-at-law."

"To title and estates--such as they are?"

"To both, my lord."

"Then follow me another step, Stubbs. Failing John Audley, who is the
next heir?"

"Mr. Peter Audley," Stubbs replied, "his only brother, would succeed,
if he were alive. But it is common ground that he is dead. I knew Mr.
Peter, and, if I may say it of an Audley, my lord, a more shiftless,
weak, improvident gentleman never lived. And obstinate as the devil!
He married into trade, and Mr. John never forgave it--never forgave
it, my lord. Never spoke of his brother or to his brother from that
time. It was before the Reform Bill," the lawyer continued with a
sigh. "There were no railways then and things were different. Dear,
dear, how the world changes! Mr. Peter must have gone abroad ten years
ago, but until he was mentioned in the suit I don't think that I had
heard his name ten times in as many years. And he an Audley!"

"He had a child?"

"Only one, a daughter."

"Would she come in after Mr. John?"

"Yes, my lord, she would--if living."

"I've been talking to her this evening."

"Ah!" The lawyer was not so simple as he seemed, and for a minute or
two he had foreseen the _dénouement_. "Ah!" he repeated, thoughtfully
rubbing his plump calf. "I see, my lord. Mr. Peter Audley's daughter?
Really! And if I may venture to ask, what is she like?"

Audley paused before he answered. Then, "If you have painted the
father aright, Stubbs, I should say that she was his opposite in all
but his obstinacy. A calm and self-reliant young woman, if I am any
judge."

"And handsome?"

"Yes, with a look of breeding. At the same time she is penniless and
dependent, teaching English in a kind of charity school, cheek by jowl
with a princess!"

"God bless my soul!" cried the lawyer, astonished at last. "A
princess!"

"Who is a good creature as women go, but as likely as not to send her
adrift to-morrow."

"Tut-tut-tut!" muttered the other.

"However, I'll tell you the story," Audley concluded. And he did so.

When he had done, "Well," Stubbs exclaimed, "for a coincidence----"

"Ah, there," the young man broke in, "I fancy, all's not said. I take
it the Princess noted the name, but was too polite to question me.
Anyway, the girl is there. She is dependent, friendless; attractive,
and well-bred. For a moment it did occur to me--she is John Audley's
heiress--that I might make all safe by----" His voice dropped. His
last words were inaudible.

"The chance is so very remote," said the lawyer, aware that he was on
delicate ground, and that the other was rather following out his own
thoughts than consulting him.

"It is. The idea crossed my mind only for a moment--of course it's
absurd for a man as poor as I am. There is hardly a poorer peer out of
Ireland--you know that. Fourteenth baron without a roof to my house
or a pane of glass in my windows! And a rent-roll when all is told
of----"

"A little short of three thousand," the lawyer muttered.

"Two thousand five hundred, by God, and not a penny more! If any man
ought to marry money, I am that man, Stubbs!"

Mr. Stubbs, staring at the fire with a hand on each knee, assented
respectfully. "I've always hoped that you would, my lord," he said,
"though I've not ventured to say it."

"Yes! Well--putting that aside," the other resumed, "what is to be
done about her? I've been thinking it over, and I fancy that I've hit
on the right line. John Audley's given me trouble enough. I'll give
him some. I'll make him provide for her, d--n him, or I don't know my
man!"

"I'd like to know, my lord," Stubbs ventured thoughtfully, "why he
didn't answer her letters. He hated her father, but it is not like Mr.
John to let the young lady drift. He's crazy about the family, and she
is his next heir. He's a lonely man, too, and there is room at the
Gatehouse."

Audley paused, half-way across the room. "I wish we had never leased
the Gatehouse to him!"

"It's not everybody's house, my lord. It's lonely and----"

"It's too near Beaudelays!"

"If your lordship were living at the Great House, quite so," the
lawyer agreed. "But, as it is, the rent is useful, and the lease was
made before our time, so that we have no choice."

"I shall always believe that he had a reason for going there!"

"He had an idea that it strengthened his claim," the lawyer said
indulgently. "Nothing beyond that, my lord."

"Well, I've made up my mind to increase his family by a niece!" the
other replied. "He shall have the girl whether he likes it or not.
Take a pen, man, and sit down. He's spoiled my breakfast many a time
with his confounded Writs of Error, or whatever you call them, and for
once I'll be even with him. Say--yes, Stubbs, say this:

"'I am directed by Lord Audley to inform you that a young lady,
believed to be a daughter of the late Mr. Peter Audley, and recently
living in poverty in an obscure'--yes, Stubbs, say obscure--'part of
Paris, has been rescued by the benevolence of a Polish lady. For the
present she is in the lady's house in a menial capacity, and is
dependent on her charity. Lord Audley is informed that the young lady
made application to you without result, but this report his lordship
discredits. Still, he feels himself concerned; and if those to whom
she naturally looks decline to aid her, it is his lordship's intention
to make such provision as may enable her to live respectably. I am to
inform you that Miss Audley's address is the Hôtel Lambert, He St.
Louis, Paris. Letters should be addressed "Care of the Housekeeper."'"

"He won't like the last touch!" the young man continued, with a quiet
chuckle. "If that does not touch him on the raw, I'll yield up the
title to-morrow. And now, Stubbs, good-night."

But Stubbs did not take the hint. "I want to say one word, my lord,
about the borough--about Riddsley," he said. "We put in Mr. Mottisfont
at the last election, your lordship's interest just tipping the scale.
We think, therefore, that a word from you may set right what is going
wrong."

"What is it?"

"There's a strong feeling," the lawyer answered, his face serious,
"that the party is not being led aright. And that Mr. Mottisfont, who
is old----"

"Is willing to go with the party, eh, Stubbs?"

"No, my lord, with the party leaders. Which is a different thing.
Sir Robert Peel--the land put him in, but, d--n me, my lord"--the
lawyer's manner lost much of its deference and he spoke bluntly and
strongly--"it looks as if he were going to put the land out! An
income-tax in peace time, we've taken that. And less protection for
the farmer, very good--if it must be. But all this taking off of
duties, this letting in of Canadian corn--I tell you, my lord, there's
an ugly feeling abroad! There are a good many in Riddsley say that he
is going to repeal the Corn Laws altogether; that he's sold us to the
League, and won't be long before he delivers us!"

The big man sitting back in his chair smiled. "It seems to me," he
said, "that you are travelling rather fast and rather far, Stubbs!"

"That's just what we fear Sir Robert is doing!" the lawyer retorted
smartly, the other's rank forgotten. "And you may take it from me the
borough won't stand it, my lord, and the sooner Mr. Mottisfont has a
hint the better. If he follows Peel too far, the bottom will fall out
of his seat. There's no Corn Law leaguer will ever sit for Riddsley!"

"With your help, anyway, Stubbs," my lord said with a smile. The
lawyer's excitement amused him.

"No, my lord! Never with my help! I believe that on the landed
interest rests the stability of the country! It was the landed
interest that supported Pitt and beat Bony, and brought us through
the long war. It was the landed interest that kept us from revolution
in the dark days after the war. And now because the men that turn
cotton and iron and clay into money by the help of the devil's
breath--because they want to pay lower wages----"

"The ark of the covenant is to be overthrown, eh?" the young man
laughed. "Why, to listen to you, Stubbs, one would think that you were
the largest landowner in the county!"

"No, my lord," the lawyer answered. "But it's the landowners have made
me what I am. And it's the landowners and the farmers that Riddsley
lives by and is going to stand by! And the sooner Mr. Mottisfont knows
that the better. He was elected as a Tory, and a Tory he must stop,
whether Sir Robert turns his coat or not!"

"You want me to speak to Mottisfont?"

"We do, my lord. Just a word. I was at the Ordinary last fair day, and
there was nothing else talked of. Free Canadian corn was too like free
French corn and free Belgian corn for Stafford wits to see much
difference. And Peel is too like repeal, my lord. We are beginning to
see that."

Audley shrugged his shoulders. "The party is satisfied," he said. "And
Mottisfont? I can't drive the man."

"No, but a word from you----"

"Well, I'll think about it. But I fancy you're overrunning the scent."

"Then the line is not straight!" the lawyer retorted shrewdly.
"However, if I have been too warm, I beg pardon, my lord."

"I'll bear it in mind," Audley answered. "Very good. And now,
good-night, Stubbs. Don't forget to send the letter to John Audley as
soon as you reach London."

Stubbs replied that he would, and took his leave. He had said his say
on the borough question, lord or no lord; which to a Briton--and he
was a typical Briton--was a satisfaction.

But half an hour later, when he had drawn his nightcap down to his
ears and stood, the extinguisher in his hand, he paused. "He's a sober
hand for a young man," he thought, "a very sober hand. I warrant he
will never run his ship on the rocks for lack of a good look-out!"




                              CHAPTER IV

                            HOMEWARD BOUND


In the corner of the light diligence, seating six inside, which had
brought her from Montreuil, Mary Audley leant forward, looking out
through the dingy panes for the windmills of Calais. Joséphine slept
in the corner facing her, as she had slept for two hours past. Their
companions, a French shopkeeper and her child, and an English bagman,
sighed and fidgeted, as travellers had cause to sigh and fidget in
days when he was lucky who covered the distance from Paris to Calais
in twenty-five hours. The coach rumbled on. The sun had set, a small
rain was falling. The fading light tinged the plain of the Pas de
Calais with a melancholy which little by little dyed the girl's
thoughts.

She was on her way to her own country, to those on whom she might be
dependent without shame. And common sense, of which she had a large
share, told her that she had cause, great cause to be thankful. But
the flush of relief, to which the opening prospect had given rise, was
ebbing. The life before her was new, those amongst whom she must lead
that life were strange; nor did the cold phrases of her uncle's
invitation, which ignored both her father and the letters that she had
written, promise an over-warm welcome.

Still, "Courage!" Mary murmured to herself, "Courage!" And she
recalled a saying which she had learned from the maid, "At the worst,
ten fingers!" Then, seeing that at last they were entering the streets
of the town and that the weary journey was over--she had left Paris
the day before--she touched Joséphine. "We are there," she said.

The maid awoke with her eyes on the bagman, who was stout. "Ah!" she
muttered. "In England they are like that! No wonder that they travel
seeing that their bones are so padded! But, for me I am one ache."

They jolted over the uneven pavement, crossed a bridge, lumbered
through streets scarcely wider than the swaying diligence, at last
with a great cracking of whips they swerved to the left and drew up
amid the babel of the quay. In a twinkling they were part of it.
Porters dragged down, fought for, snatched up their baggage.
English-speaking touts shook dirty cards in their faces. Tide-waiters
bawled questions in their ears. The postilion, the conductor, all the
world stretched greedy palms under their noses. Other travellers ran
into them, and they ran into other travellers. All this, in the dusk,
in the rain, while the bell on the deck overhead clanged above the
roar of the escaping steam, and a man shouted without ceasing, "Tower
steamer! Tower steamer! Any more for England?"

Joséphine, after one bitter exchange of words with a lad who had
seized her handbag, thrust her fingers into her ears and resigned
herself. Even Mary for a moment was aghast. She was dragged this way
and that, she lost one article and recovered it, lost another and
recovered that, she lost her ticket and rescued it from a man's hand.
At last, her baggage on board, she found herself breathless at the
foot of the ladder, with three passengers imploring her to ascend, and
six touts clinging to her skirts and crying for drink-money. She had
barely time to make her little gift to the kind-hearted maid--who was
returning to Paris by the night coach--and no time to thank her,
before they were parted. Mary was pushed up the ladder. In a moment
she was looking down from the deck on the wet, squalid quay, the pale
up-turned faces, the bustling crowd.

She picked out the one face which she knew, and which it pained her to
lose. By gestures and smiles, with a tear in the eye, she tried to
make amends to Joséphine for the hasty parting, the half-spoken words.
The maid on her side was in tears, and after the French fashion was
proud of them. So the last minute came. The paddles were already
turning, the ship was going slowly astern, when a man pushed his way
through the crowd. He clutched the ladder as it was unhooked, and at
some risk and much loss of dignity he was bundled on board. There was
a lamp amidships, and, as he regained his balance, Mary, smiling in
spite of herself, saw that he was an Englishman, a man about thirty,
and plainly dressed. Then in her anxiety to see the last of Joséphine
she crossed the deck as the ship went about, and she lost sight of
him.

She continued to look back and to wave her handkerchief, until
nothing remained but a light or two in a bank of shadow. That was the
last she was to see of the land which had been her home for ten years;
and chilled and lonely she turned about and did what, had she been
an older traveller, she would have done before. She sought the
after-cabin. Alas, a glance from the foot of the companion was enough!
Every place was taken, every couch occupied, and the air, already
close, repelled her. She climbed to the deck again, and was seeking
some corner where she could sit, sheltered from the wind and rain,
when the captain saw her and fell foul of her.

"Now, young lady," he said, "no woman's allowed on deck at night!"

"Oh, but," she protested, "there's no room downstairs!"

