said. "She'd come to us sometimes, and there'd be no call for us to go
to her."

Mr. Colet looked at Etruria. "If Etruria will come to me," he said, "I
will be ashamed neither of her nor her parents."

"Bravely said!" Mary cried.

"But there's more to it than that," Mrs. Toft objected. "A deal more.
Mr. Colet nor 'Truria can't live upon air. And it's my opinion that if
his reverence gets a curacy, he'll lose it as soon as it's known who
his wife is. And he can't dig and he can't beg, and where'll they be
with the parsons all sticking to one another as close as wax?"

"He'll not need them!" replied a new speaker, and that speaker was
Toft. He had entered silently, none of them had seen him, and the
interruption took them aback. "He'll not need them," he repeated, "nor
their curacies. He'll not need to dig nor beg. There's changes coming.
There's changes coming for more than him, Miss. If Mr. Colet's willing
to take my girl she'll not go to him empty-handed."

"I will take her as she stands," Mr. Colet said, his eyes shining.
"She knows that."

"Well, you'll take her, sir, asking your pardon, with what I give
her," Toft answered. "And that'll be five hundred pounds that I have
in hand, and five hundred more that I look to get. Put 'em together
and they'll buy what's all one with a living, and you'll be your own
rector and may snap your fingers at 'em!"

They stared at the man, while Mrs. Toft, in an awestruck tone, cried,
"You're out of your mind, Toft! Five hundred pounds! Whoever heard of
the like of us with that much money?"

"Silence, woman," Toft said. "You know naught about it."

"But, Toft," Mary said, "are you in earnest? Do you understand what a
large sum of money this is?"

"I have it," the man replied, his sallow cheek reddening. "I have it,
and it's for Etruria."

"If this be true," Mr. Colet said slowly, "I don't know what to say,
Toft."

"You've said all that is needful, sir," Toft replied. "It's long
I've looked forward to this. She's yours, and she'll not come to you
empty-handed, and you'll have no need to be ashamed of a wife that
brings you a living. We'll not trouble except to see her at odd times
in the year. It will be enough for her mother and me that she'll be a
lady. She never was like us."

"Hear the man!" cried Mrs. Toft between admiration and protest. "You'd
suppose she wasn't our child!"

But Mary went to him and gave him her hand. "That's very fine, Toft,"
she said. "I believe Etruria will be as happy as she is good, and Mr.
Colet will have a wife of whom he may be proud. But Etruria will not
be Etruria if she forgets her parents or your gift. Only you are sure
that you are not deceiving yourself?"

"There's my bank-book to show for half of it," Toft replied. "The
other half is as certain if I live three months!"

"Well, I declare!" Mrs. Toft cried. "If anybody'd told me yesterday
that I'd have--'Truria, han't you got a word to say?"

Etruria's answer was to throw her arms round her father's neck. Yet
it is doubtful if the moment was as much to her as to the ungainly,
grim--visaged man, who looked so ill at ease in her embrace.

The contrast between them was such that Mary hastened to relieve the
sufferer. "Etruria will have more to say to Mr. Colet," she said,
"than to us. Suppose we leave them to talk it over."

She saw the Tofts out after another word or two, and followed them.
"Well, well, well!" said Mrs. Toft, when they stood in the hall. "I'm
sure I wish that everybody was as lucky this day--if all's true as
Toft tells us."

"There's some in luck that don't know it!" the man said oracularly.
And he slid away.

"If he said black was white, I'd believe him after this," his wife
exclaimed, "asking your pardon, Miss, for the liberties we've taken!
But you'd always a fancy for 'Truria. Anyway, if there's one will be
pleased to hear the news, it's the Squire! If I'd some of those nine
here that voted against him I'd made their ears burn!"

"But perhaps they thought that Mr. Basset was wrong," Mary said.

"What business had they o' thinking?" Mrs. Toft replied. "They had
ought to vote; that's enough for them."

"Well, it does seem a pity," Mary allowed. And then, because she
fancied that Mrs. Toft looked at her with meaning, she went upstairs
and, putting on her hat and cloak, went out. The day was cold and
bright, a sprinkling of snow lay on the ground, and a walk promised
her an opportunity of thinking things over. Between the Butterflies,
at the entrance to the flagged yard, she hung a moment in doubt, then
she set off across the park in the direction of the Great House.

At first her thoughts were busy with Etruria's fortunes and the
mysterious windfall which had enriched Toft. How had he come by it?
How could he have come by it? And was the man really sane? But soon
her mind took another turn. She had strayed this way on the morning
after her arrival at the Gatehouse, and, remembering this, she looked
across the gray, frost-bitten park, with its rows of leafless trees
and its naked vistas. Her mind travelled back to that happy morning,
and involuntarily she glanced behind her.

But to-day no one followed her, no one was thinking of her. Basset was
gone, gone for good, and it was she who had sent him away. The May
morning when he had hurried after her, the May sunshine, gay with the
songs of larks and warm with the scents of spring were of the past.
To-day she looked on a bare, cold landscape and her thoughts matched
it. Yet she had no ground to complain, she told herself, no reason to
be unhappy. Things might have been worse, ah, so much worse, she
reflected. For a week ago she had been a captive, helpless, netted in
her own folly! And now she was free.

Yes, she ought to be happy, being free; and, more than free,
independent.

But she must go from here. And for many reasons the thought of going
was painful to her. During the nine months which she had spent at the
Gatehouse it had become a home. Its panelled rooms, its austerity, its
stillness, the ancient woodlands about it were endeared to her by the
memory of lamp-lit evenings and long summer days. The very plainness
and solitude of the life, which had brought the Tofts and Etruria so
near to her, had been a charm. And if her sympathy with her uncle had
been imperfect, still he had been her uncle and he had been kind to
her.

All this she must leave, and something else which she did not define;
which was bound up with it, and which she had come to value when it
was too late. She had taken brass for gold, and tin for silver! And
now it was too late. So that it was no wonder that when she came to
the hawthorn-tree where she had gathered her may that morning, a sob
rose in her throat. She knew the tree! She had marked it often. But
to-day there was no one to follow her, no one to call her back, no one
to say that she should go no farther. Basset was gone, her uncle was
dead.

Telling herself that, as she would never see it again, she would go as
far as the Great House, she pushed on to the Yew Walk. Its recesses
showed dark, the darker for the sprinkling of snow that lay in the
park. But it was high noon, there was nothing to fear, and she pursued
the path until she came to the crumbling monster that tradition said
was a butterfly.

She was still viewing it with awe, thinking now of the duel which had
taken place there, now of her uncle's attack, when a bird moved in the
copse and she glanced nervously behind her, expecting she knew not
what. The dark yews shut her in, and involuntarily she shivered. What
if, in this solitary place--and then through the silence the sharp
click of the Iron Gate reached her ear.

The stillness and the associations shook her nerves. She heard
footsteps and, hardly knowing what she feared, she slipped among the
trees and stood half-hidden. A moment passed and a man appeared. He
came from the Great House. He crossed the opening slowly, his chin
sunk upon his breast, his eyes bent on the path before him. A moment
and he was gone, the way she had come, without seeing her.

It was Lord Audley, and foolish as the impulse to hide herself had
been, she blessed it. Nothing pleasant, nothing good, could have come
of their meeting; and into her thoughts of him had crept so much of
distaste that she was glad that she had not met him in this lonely
spot. She went on to the Iron Gate, and viewed for a few moments the
desolate lawn and the long, gaunt front. Then, reflecting that if she
turned back at once she might meet him, she took a side-path through
the plantation, and emerged on the park at another point.

She was careful not to reach home until late in the day and then she
learned that he had called, that he had waited, and that in the end
Toft had seen him; and that he had departed in no good temper. "What
Toft said to him," Mrs. Toft reported, "I know no more than the moon,
but whatever it was his lordship marched off, Miss, as black as
thunder."

After that nothing happened, and of the four at the Gatehouse Etruria
alone was content. Mrs. Toft was uneasy about the future--what were
they going to do?--and perplexed by Toft's mysterious fortune--how had
he come by it? Toft himself was on the rack, looking for things to
happen--and nothing happened. And Mary knew that she must take action.
She could not stay at the Gatehouse, she could not remain as the guest
either of Basset or of Lord Audley.

But she did not know where to go, and no suggestion reached her. At
length she wrote, two days after Lord Audley's visit, to Quebec
Street, to the house where she had stayed with her father many years
before. It was the only address of the kind that she knew. But she
received no answer, and her heart sank. The difficulty, small as it
was, harassed her; she had no adviser, and ten times a day, to keep up
her spirits, she had tell herself that she was independent, that she
had eight thousand pounds, that the whole world was open to her, and
that compared with the penniless girl who had lived on the upper floor
of the Hôtel Lambert she was fortunate!

But in the Hôtel Lambert she had had work to do, and here she had
none!

She thought of taking rooms in Riddsley, but Lord Audley was there and
she shrank from meeting him. She would wait another week for the
answer from London, and then, if none came, she must decide what she
would do. But in her room that night the thought that Basset had
abandoned her, that he no longer cared, no longer desired to come near
her, broke her down. Of course, he was not to blame. He fancied her
still engaged to her cousin and receiving from him all the advice, all
the help, all the love, she needed. He fancied her happy and content,
in no need of him. And, alas, there was the pinch. She had written to
him to tell him of her engagement. She could not write to him to tell
him that it was at an end!

And then, by the morrow's post, there came a long letter from Basset,
and in the letter the whole astonishing, overwhelming story of the
discovery of the document which John Audley had sought so long, and in
the end so disastrously.


"No doubt," the writer added, "Lord Audley has made you acquainted
with the facts, but I think it my duty as your uncle's executor to
lay them before you in detail and also to advise you that in your
interest and in view of the change in your position--and in Lord
Audley's--which this imports, it is proper that you should have
independent advice."


The blood ebbed and left Mary pale; it returned in a flood as with a
bounding heart and shaking fingers she read and turned and re-read
this letter. At length she grasped its meaning, and truly what
astounding, what overwhelming news! What a shift of fortune! What a
reversal of expectations! And how strangely, how singularly had all
things shaped themselves to bring this about--were it true!

Unable to sit still, unable to control her excitement--and no
wonder--she rose and paced the floor. If she were indeed Lady Audley!
If this were indeed all hers! This dear house and the Great House!
This which had seemed to its possessor so small, so meagre, so
cramping an inheritance, but was to her fortune, an old name, a great
place, a firm position in the world! A position that offered so many
opportunities and so much power for good!

She walked the room with throbbing pulses, the letter now crushed in
her hand, now smoothed out that she might assure herself of its
meaning, might read again some word or some sentence, might resolve
some doubt. Oh, it was a wonderful, it was a marvellous, it was an
incredible turn of fortune! And presently her mind began to deal with
and to sift the past. And, enlightened, she understood many of the
things that had perplexed her, and read many of the riddles that had
baffled her. And her cheeks burned, her heart was hot with
indignation.




                            CHAPTER XXXIX

                       THE DEED OF RENUNCIATION


Basset moved in his chair. He was unhappy and ill at ease. He looked
at the fire, he looked askance at Mary. "But do you mean," he said,
"that you knew nothing about this until you had my letter?"

"Nothing," Mary answered, "not a word." She, too, found it more easy
to look at the fire.

"You must have been very much surprised?"

"I was. It was for that reason that I asked you to bring me the
papers--to bring me everything, so that I might see for myself how it
was."

"I don't understand why Audley did not tell you. He said he would."

It was the question Mary had foreseen and dreaded. She had slept two
nights upon the letter and given a long day's thought to it, and
she had made up her mind what she would do and how she would do it.
But between the planning and the doing there were passages which she
would fain have shunned, fain have omitted, had it been possible; and
this was one of them. She saw that there was nothing else for it,
however--the thing must be told, and told by her. She tried, and not
without success, to command her voice. "He did not tell me," she said.
"Indeed I have not seen him. And I ought to say, Mr. Basset, you ought
to know in these circumstances--that the engagement between my cousin
and myself is at an end."

He may have started--he might well be astonished, in view of the
business which brought him there. But he did not speak, and Mary could
not tell what effect it had on him. She only knew that the silence
seemed age-long, the pause cruel, and that her heart was beating so
loudly that it seemed to her that he must hear it. At last, "Do you
mean," he asked, his voice muffled and uncertain, "that it is all over
between you?"

"It is quite over between us," she answered soberly. "It was a mistake
from the beginning."

"When--when did he----"

"Oh, before this arose. Some time before this arose." She spoke
lightly, but her cheeks were hot.

"He did not tell me."

"No?"

"No," Basset repeated. He spoke angrily, as if he felt this a
grievance, but in no other way could he have masked his emotion.
Perhaps he did not mask it altogether, for she was observing him--ah,
how keenly was she observing him! "On the contrary, he led me to
believe," he continued, "that things were as before between you, and
that he would tell you this himself. It was for that reason that I let
a week go by before I wrote to you."

"Just so," she said, squeezing her handkerchief into a ball, and
telling herself that the worst was over now, the story told, that in
another minute this would be done and past. "Just so, I quite
understand. At any rate there is no longer any question of that, Mr.
Basset. And now," briskly, "may I see this famous deed which is to do
so much. You brought it with you, I hope?"

"Yes, I brought it," he answered heavily. He took a packet of papers
from his breast-pocket, and it did not escape her--she was cooler
now--that his fingers were not as steady as a man's fingers should be.
The packet he brought out was tied about with old and faded green
ribbon, and bore a docket on the outside. She looked at it with
curiosity. That ribbon had been tied by a long-dead hand in the reign
of Queen Anne! Those yellowish papers had lain in damp and darkness a
hundred and forty years, that in the end they might take John Audley's
life! "I brought them from the bank this afternoon," he explained.
"They have been in the bank's custody since they were handed to me,
and I must return them to the bank to-night."

"Everything depends upon them, I suppose?"

"Everything."

"But I thought that it was a deed--just one paper?" she said.

"The actual instrument is a deed. This one!" He took it from the
series as he untied the packet. "The other papers are of value as
corroboration. They are letters, original letters, bearing on the
preparation of the agreement. They were found all together as they are
now, and in the same order. I did not disclose the letters to Audley,
or to his lawyer, because I had not then gone through them; nor was it
necessary to disclose them. I have since examined them, and they
provide ample proof of the genuineness of the deed."

"So that you think...?"

"I do not think that it can be contested. I am sure that it
cannot--with success. And if it be admitted, your opponent's case is
gone. It was practically common ground in the former suit that if this
agreement could be produced and proved his claim fell to the ground.
Yours remains. I do not suppose," Basset concluded, "that he will
contest it, save as a matter of form."

"I am sorry for him," she said thoughtfully. And almost for the first
time her eyes met his. But he was not responsive. He shrugged his
shoulders. "He has had it long enough to feel the loss of it," she
continued, still bidding for his sympathy. "May I look at that
now--the deed?" She held out her hand.

He gave it to her. It was a folded sheet of parchment, yellow with age
and not very large, perhaps ten inches square. Three or four seals of
green wax on ribbon ends dangled from it. It was written all over in a
fine and curious penmanship, its initial letter adorned with a
portrait of Queen Anne; altogether a pretty and delicate thing, but
small--so small, she thought, to effect so great a change, to carry,
to wreck, to make the fortunes of a house!

She handled it gently, almost fearfully, with awe and a little
distaste. She turned it, she read the signatures. They were clear but
faint. The ink had turned brown.

"Peter Paravicini Audley," she murmured. "He must have signed it
sadly, to save his wife, his cousin, a young girl, a girl of my age
perhaps! To save her name!" There was a quaver in her voice. Basset
moved uncomfortably.

"They are all dead," he said.

"Yes, they are all dead," she agreed. "And their joys and failings,
hopes and fears--all dead! It seems a pity that this should live to
betray them."

"Not a pity on your account."

"No. You are glad, of course?"

"That you should have your rights?" he said manfully. "Of course I
am."

"And you congratulate me?" She rose and held out her hand. Her eyes
were shining, there were tears in them, and her face was marvellously
soft. "You will be the first, won't you, to congratulate me? You who
have done so much for me, you who have been my friend through all? You
who have brought me this? You will wish me joy?"

He was deeply moved; how deeply he could not hide from her, and her
last doubt faded. He took her hand--his own was cold--but he could not
speak. At last, "May you be very happy! It is my one wish, Lady
Audley!"

She let his hand fall. "Thank you," she said gently. "I think that I
shall be happy. And now--now," in a firmer tone, "will you do
something for me, Mr. Basset? It is not much. Will you deal with Toft
for me? You told me in your letter that he held my uncle's note for
£800, to be paid in the event of the discovery of these papers? And
that £300, already paid, might be set off against this?"

"That is so."

"The money should be paid, of course."

"I fear it must be paid."

"Will you see him and tell him that it shall be. I--I am fond of
Etruria, but I am not so fond of Toft, and I would rather not--would
you see him about this?"

"I quite understand," Basset answered. "Of course I will do it." They
had both regained the ordinary plane of feeling and he spoke in his
usual tone. "You would like me to see him now?"

"If you please."

He went from the room. There were other things that as executor he
must arrange, and when he had dealt with Toft, and not without a hard
word or two that went home, had settled that matter, he went round the
house and gave the orders he had to give. The light was beginning to
fail and shadows to fill the corners, and as he glanced into this room
and that and viewed the long-remembered places and saw ghosts and
heard the voices of the dead, he knew that he was taking leave of many
things, of things that had made up a large part of his life.

And he had other thoughts hardly more cheering. Mary's engagement was
broken off. But how? By whom? Had she freed herself? Or had Audley,
_immemor Divum_, and little foreseeing the discovery that trod upon
his threshold, freed her? And if so, why? He was in the dark as to
this and as to all--her attitude, her thoughts, her feelings. He knew
only that while her freedom trebled the moment of the news he had
brought, the gifts of fortune which that news laid at her feet, rose
insuperable between them and formed a barrier he could not pass.

For he could never woo her now. Whatever dawn of hope crept quivering
above the horizon--and she had been kind, ah, in that moment of
softness and remembrance she had been kind!--he could never speak now.

The dusk was far advanced and firelight was almost the only light
when, after half an hour's absence, he returned to the parlor. Mary
was standing before the hearth, her slender figure darkly outlined
against the blaze. She held the poker in her hand, and she was
stooping forward; and something in her pose, something in the tense
atmosphere of the room, drew his gaze--he never knew why--to the table
on which he had left the papers. It was bare. He looked round, he
could not see them, a cry broke from him. "Mary!"

"They don't burn easily," she said, a quaver of exultation and
defiance in her tone. "Parchment is so hard to burn--it burns so
slowly, though I made a good fire on purpose!"

"D--n!" he cried, and he was going to seize, he tried to seize her
arm. But he saw the next moment that it was useless, he saw that it
was too late. "Are you mad? Are you mad?" he cried. Frantically, he
went down on his knees, he raked among the embers. But he knew that it
was futile, he had known it before he knelt, and he stood up again
with a gesture of despair. "My G--d!" he said. "Do you know what you
have done? You have destroyed what cannot be replaced! You have ruined
your claim! You must have been mad! Mad, to do it!"

"Why, mad? Because I do not wish to be Lady Audley?" she said, facing
him calmly, with her hands behind her.

"Mad!" he repeated, bitter self-reproach in his voice. For he felt
himself to blame, he felt the full burden of his responsibility. He
had left the papers with her, the true value of which she might not
have known! And she had done this dreadful, this fatal, this
irreparable thing!

She faced his anger without a quiver. "Why, mad!" she repeated. She
was quite at her ease now. "Because, having been jilted by my cousin,
I do not wish for this common, this vulgar, this poor revenge? Because
I will not stoop to the game he plays and has played? Because I will
not take from him what is little to me who have not had it, but much,
nay all, to him who has?"

"But your uncle?" he cried. He was striving desperately to collect
himself, trying to see the thing all round and not only as she saw it,
but in its consequences. "Your uncle, whose one aim, whose one object
in life----"

"Was to be Lord Audley? Believe me," she replied gently, "he sees more
clearly now. And he is dead."

"But there are still--those who come after you?"

"Will they be better, happier, more useful?" she answered. "Will they
be less Audleys, with less of ancient blood running in their veins
because of what I have done? Because I have refused to rake up this
old, pitiful, forgotten stain, this scandal of Queen Elizabeth? No, a
thousand times no! And do not think, do not think," she continued more
soberly, "that I have acted in haste or on impulse. I have not had
this out of my thoughts for a moment since I knew the truth. I have
weighed, carefully weighed, the price, and as carefully decided to pay
it. My duty? I can do it, I hope, as well in one station as another.
For the rest there is only one who will lose by it"--she faced him
bravely now--"only one who will have the right to blame me--ever."

"I may have no right----"

"No you have no right at present."

"Still----"

"When you have the right--when you have gained the right, if ever--you
may blame me."

Was he deceived? Was it the fact or only his fancy, a mere
will-o'-the-wisp inviting him to trouble that led him to imagine that
she looked at him queerly? With a mingling of raillery and tenderness,
with a tear and a smile, with something in her eyes that he had never
seen in them before? With--with--but her face was in shadow, she had
her back to the blaze that filled the room with dancing lights, and
his thoughts were in a turmoil of confusion. "I wish I knew," he said
in a low voice, "what you meant by that?"

"By what?"

"By what you have just said. Did you mean that now that he--now that
Audley is out of the way, there was a chance for me?"

"A chance for you?" she repeated. She stared at him in seeming
astonishment.

"Don't play with me!" he cried, advancing upon her. "You understand
me? You understand me very well! Yes, or no, Mary?"

She did not flinch. "There is no chance for you," she answered slowly,
still confronting him. "If there be a second chance for me----"

"Ah!"

"For me, Peter?" And with that her tone told him all, all there was to
tell. "If you are willing to take me second-hand," she continued, with
a tremulous laugh, "you may take me. I don't deserve it, but I know my
own mind now. I have known it since the day my uncle died and I heard
your step come through the hall. And if you are still willing?"

He did not answer her, but he took her. He held her to him, his heart
too full for anything but a thankfulness beyond speech, while she,
shaken out of her composure, trembled between tears and laughter.
"Peter! Peter!" she said again and again. And once, "We are the same
height, Peter!" and so showed him a new side of her nature which
thrilled him with surprise and happiness.

That she brought him no title, no lands, that by her own act she had
flung away her inheritance and came to him almost empty-handed was no
pain to him, no subject for regret. On the contrary, every word she
had said on that, every argument she had used, came home to him now
with double force. It had been a poor, it had been a common, it had
been a pitiful revenge! It had mingled the sordid with the cup, it had
cast the shadow of the Great House on their happiness. In that room in
which they had shared their first meal on that far May morning, and
where the light of the winter fire now shone on the wainscot, now
brought life to the ruffed portraits above it, there was no question
of name or fortune, or more or less.

So much so, that when Mrs. Toft came in with the tea she well-nigh
dropped the tray in her surprise. As she said afterwards, "The sight
of them two as close as chives in a barrel, I declare you might ha'
knocked me down with a straw! God bless 'em!"




                              CHAPTER XL

                    "LET US MAKE OTHERS THANKFUL"


A man can scarcely harbor a more bitter thought than that he has lost
by foul play what fair play would have won for him. This for a week
was Lord Audley's mood and position; for masterful as he was he owned
the power of Nemesis, he felt the force of tradition, nor, try as he
might, could he convince himself that in face of this oft-cited deed
his chance of retaining the title and property was anything but
desperate. He made the one attempt to see Mary of which we know; and
had he seen her he would have done his best to knot again the tie
which he had cut. But missing her by a hair's breadth, and confronted
by Toft who knew all, he had found even his courage unequal to a
second attempt. The spirit in which Mary had faced the breach had
shown his plan to be from the first a counsel of despair, and
despairing he let her go. In a dark mood he sat down to wait for the
next step on the enemy's part, firmly resolved that whatever form it
might take he would contest the claim to the bitter end.

And Stubbs was scarcely in happier case. At the time, and face to face
with Basset, he had borne up well, but the production of the fateful
deed had none the less fallen on him with stunning effect. He
appreciated--none better and more clearly now--what the effect of his
easiness would have been had Lord Audley not been engaged to his
cousin; nor did his negligence appear in a less glaring light because
his patron was to escape its worst results. He foresaw that whatever
befel he must suffer, and that the agency which his family had so long
enjoyed--that, that at any rate was forfeit.

This was enough to make him a most unhappy, a most miserable man. But
it did not stand alone. Everything seemed to him to be going wrong.
All good things, public and private, seemed to be verging on their
end. The world as he had known it for sixty years was crumbling about
his ears. It was time that he was gone.

Certainly the days of that Protection with which he believed the
welfare of the land to be bound up, were numbered. In the House Lord
George and Mr. Disraeli--those strangest of bedfellows!--might rage,
the old Protectionist party might foam, invective and sarcasm, taunt
and sneer might rain upon the traitor as he sat with folded arms and
hat drawn down to his eyes, rectors might fume and squires swear; the
end was certain, and Stubbs saw that it was. Those rascals in the
North, they and their greed and smoke, that stained the face of
England, would win and were winning. He had saved Riddsley by
nine--but to what end? What was one vote among so many? He thought of
the nut-brown ale, the teeming stacks, the wagoner's home,


              Hard-by, a cottage chimney smokes
              From betwixt two aged oaks.


He thought of the sweet cow-stalls, the brook where he had bent his
first pin, and he sighed. Half the country folk would be ruined, and
Shoddy from Halifax and Brass from Bury would buy their lands and walk
in gaiters where better men had foundered. The country would be full
of new men--Peels!

Well, it would last his time. But some day there would rise another
Buonaparte and they would find Cobden with his calico millennium a
poor stay against starvation, his lean and flashy songs a poor
substitute for wheat. It was all money now; the kindly feeling, the
Christmas dole, the human ties, where father had worked for father and
son for son, and the thatch had covered three generations--all these
were past and gone. He found one fault, it is true, in the past. He
had one regret, as he looked back. The laborers' wage had been too
low; they had been left outside the umbrella of Protection. He saw
that now; there was the weak point in the case. "That's where they hit
us," he said more than once, "the foundation was too narrow." But the
knowledge came too late.

Naturally he buried his private mishap--and my lord's--in silence. But
his mien was changed. He was an altered, a shaken man. When he passed
through the streets, he walked with his chin on his breast, his
shoulders bowed. He shunned men's eyes. Then one day Basset entered
his office and for a long time was closeted with him.

When he left Stubbs left also, and his bearing was so subtly changed
as to impress all who met him; while Farthingale, stepping out in his
absence, drank his way through three brown brandies in a silence which
grew more portentous with every glass. At The Butterflies, whither the
lawyer hastened, Audley met him with moody and repellent eyes, and in
the first flush of the news which the lawyer brought refused to
believe it. It was not only that the tidings seemed too good to be
true, the relief from the nightmare which weighed upon him too great
to be readily accepted. But the thing that Mary had done was so far
out of his ken and so much beyond his understanding that he could not
rise to it, or credit it. Even when he at last took in the truth of
the story he put upon it the interpretation that was natural to him.

"It was a forgery!" he cried with an oath. "You may depend upon it, it
was a forgery and they discovered it."

But Stubbs would not agree to that. Stubbs was very stout about it,
and giving details of his conversation with Basset gradually persuaded
his patron. In one way, indeed, the news coming through him wrought a
benefit which neither Mary nor Basset had foreseen. It once more
commended him to Audley, and by and by healed the breach which had
threatened to sever the long connection between the lawyer and
Beaudelays. If Stubbs's opinion of my lord could never again be wholly
what it had been, if Audley still had hours of soreness when the
other's negligence recurred to his mind, at least they were again at
one as to the future. They were once more free to look forward to a
time when a marriage with Lady Adela, or her like, would rebuild the
fortunes of the Great House. Of Audley, whose punishment if short had
been severe, one thing at least may be ventured with safety--and
beyond this we need not inquire; that to the end his first, last,
greatest thought would be--himself!

Late in June, the Corn Laws were repealed. On the same day Sir Robert
Peel, in the eyes of some the first, in the eyes of others the last of
men, was forced to resign. Thwarted by old friends and abandoned by
new ones, he fell by a man[oe]uvre which even his enemies could not
defend. Whether he was more to be blamed for blindness than he was to
be praised for rectitude, are questions on which party spirit has much
to say, nor has history as yet pronounced a final decision. But if his
hand gave the victory to the class from which he sprang, he was at
least free from the selfishness of that class. He had ideals, he was a
man,


              He nothing common did nor mean,
              Upon that memorable scene,
                But bowed his comely head,
                Down as upon a bed.


Nor is it possible, even for those who do not agree with him, to think
of his dramatic fall without sympathy.

In the same week Basset and Mary were married. They spent their
honeymoon after a fashion of their own, for they travelled through the
north of England, and beginning with the improvements which Lord
Francis Egerton was making along the Manchester Canal, they continued
their quiet journey along the inland waterways which formed in the
'forties a link, now forgotten, between the great cities. In this
way--somewhat to the disgust of Mary's new maid, whose name was
Joséphine--they visited strange things; the famous land-warping upon
the Humber, the Doncaster drainage system in Yorkshire, the Horsfall
dairies. They brought back to the old gabled house at Blore some ideas
which were new even to old Hayward--though the "Duke" would never have
admitted this.

"Now that we are not protected, we must bestir ourselves," Basset said
on the last evening before their return. "I'll inquire about a seat,
if you like," he added reluctantly.

Mary was standing behind him. She put her hand on his shoulder. "You
are paying me out, Peter," she said. "I know now that I don't know as
much as I thought I knew."

"Which means?" Basset said, smiling.

"That once I thought that nothing could be done without an earthquake.
I know now that it can be done with a spade."

"So that where Mary was content with nothing but a gilt coach, Mrs.
Basset is content with a nutshell."

"If you are in the nutshell," Mary answered softly, "only--for what we
have received, Peter--let us make other people thankful."

"We will try," he answered.



                               THE END









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great House, by Stanley J. Weyman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT HOUSE ***

***** This file should be named 39294-8.txt or 39294-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/9/39294/

Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (University of Michigan)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Man in Black, by Stanley J. Weyman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Man in Black

Author: Stanley J. Weyman

Illustrator: Wal Paget

Release Date: March 28, 2012 [EBook #39295]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN IN BLACK ***




Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (University of Toronto)











Transcriber's Notes:

   1. Page scan source:
      http://www.archive.org/details/maninblackillust00weymuoft
      (University of Toronto)






                           THE MAN IN BLACK






[Illustration: "'IF YOU WANT ME TO--DRAW HER HOROSCOPE,' THE
ASTROLOGER REPLIED" (_p_. 89).]






                                 The
                             Man in Black




                                  BY
                          STANLEY J. WEYMAN

            _Author of "A Gentleman of France" "The Story
                       of Francis Cludde" etc_.




                            Illustrated by
                      WAL PAGET AND H. M. PAGET




                            SIXTH THOUSAND




                     CASSELL AND COMPANY Limited
                      _London Paris & Melbourne_
                                 1894
                         ALL RIGHTS RESERVED






                              CONTENTS.


   CHAPTER

         I. The Fair at Fécamp.

        II. Solomon Nôtredame.

       III. Man and Wife.

        IV. The House with Two Doors.

         V. The Upper Portal.

        VI. The Powder of Attraction.

       VII. Clytæmnestra.

      VIII. The Mark of Cain.

        IX. Before the Court.

         X. Two Witnesses.




                        LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


   "'If you want me to draw her horoscope,' the astrologer replied."
       Frontispiece

   "The showman was counting his gains into his pouch."

   "Jehan went trembling and found the hole."

   "The astrologer rose slowly from his seat."

   "Jehan leapt back with a shriek of pain."

   "For a second the man in black stood breathless."

   "'Madame! Madame de Vidoche, if you please!'"

   "He watched her every motion."

   "In a moment he was down, writhing on the floor."

   "'Who stole him? Where has he been?'"

   "They were carrying him."

   "A man, half-naked, ... crawled on to the highroad."





                          THE MAN IN BLACK.




                              CHAPTER I.

                         The Fair At Fécamp.


"_I am Jehan de Bault, Seigneur of--I know not where, and Lord of
seventeen lordships in the County of---I forget the name, of a most
noble and puissant family, possessing the High Justice, the Middle,
and the Low. In my veins runs the blood of Roland, and of my
forefathers were three marshals of France. I stand here, the_----"

It was the eve of All Saints, and the famous autumn horse-fair was in
progress at Fécamp--Fécamp on the Normandy coast, the town between the
cliffs, which Boisrosé, in the year '93, snatched for the Great King
by a feat of audacity unparalleled in war. This only by the way,
however; and that a worthy deed may not die. For at the date of this
fair of which we write, the last day of October, 1637, stout Captain
Boisrosé, whom Sully made for his daring Lieutenant-General of the
Ordnance, had long ceased to ruffle it; the Great King had lain in his
grave a score of years or more; and though Sully, duke and peer and
marshal, still lived, an aged, formal man, in his château of Villebon
by Chartres, all France, crouching under the iron hand of the
Cardinal, looked other ways.

The great snarled, biting at the hem of the red soutane. But that the
mean and Jacques Bonhomme, the merchant and the trader, flourished
under his rule, Fécamp was as good evidence this day as man could
desire. Even old burghers who remembered Charles the Ninth, and the
first glass windows ever seen in Fécamp outside the Abbey, could not
say when the price of horses had been higher or the town more full.
All day, and almost all night, the clatter of hoofs and babble of
bargains filled the narrow streets; while hucksters' cries and
drunkards' oaths, with all raucous sounds, went up to heaven like the
smoke from a furnace. The _Chariot d'Or_ and the _Holy Fig_, haunts of
those who came to buy, fairly hummed with guests, with nobles of the
province and gay sparks from Rouen, army contractors from the Rhine,
and dealers from the south. As for the _Dame Belle_ and the _Green
Man_, houses that lower down the street had food and forage for those
who came to sell, they strewed their yards a foot deep with straw, and
saying to all alike, "Voilà, monsieur!" charged the full price of a
bed.

Beyond the streets it was the same. Strings of horses and ponies, with
an army of grooms and chaunters, touts and cutpurses, camped on every
piece of level ground, while the steeper slopes and hill-sides swarmed
with troupes more picturesque, if less useful. For these were the
pitches of the stilt-walkers and funambulists, the morris dancers and
hobby-horses: in a word, of an innumerable company of quacks,
jugglers, poor students, and pasteboard giants, come together for the
delectation of the gaping Normans, and all under the sway and
authority of the Chevalier du Guet, in whose honour two gibbets, each
bearing a creaking corpse, rose on convenient situations overlooking
the fair. For brawlers and minor sinners a pillory and a whipping-post
stood handy by the landward gate, and from time to time, when a lusty
vagrant or a handsome wench was dragged up for punishment, outvied in
attraction all the professional shows.

Of these, one that seemed as successful as any in catching and
chaining the fancy of the shifting crowd consisted of three persons--a
man, a boy, and an ape--who had chosen for their pitch a portion of
the steep hill-side overhanging the road. High up in this they had
driven home an iron peg, and stretching a cord from this to the top of
a tree which stood on the farther edge of the highway, had improvised
a tight-rope at once simple and effective. All day, as the changing
throng passed to and fro below, the monkey and the boy might be seen
twisting and turning and posturing on this giddy eminence, while the
man, fantastically dressed in an iron cap a world too big for him, and
a back- and breast-piece which ill-matched his stained crimson jacket
and taffety breeches, stood beating a drum at the foot of the tree, or
now and again stepped forward to receive in a ladle the sous and eggs
and comfits that rewarded the show.

He was a lean, middle-sized man, with squinting eyes and a crafty
mouth. Unaided he might have made his living by cutting purses. But he
had the wit to do by others what he could not do himself, and the luck
to have that in his company which pleased all comers; for while the
clowns gazed saucer-eyed at the uncouth form and hideous grimaces of
the ape, the thin cheeks and panting lips of the boy touched the
hearts of their mistresses, and drew from them many a cake and
fairing. Still, with a crowd change is everything; and in the contest
of attractions, where there was here a flying dragon and there a
dancing bear, and in a place apart the mystery of Joseph of Arimathæa
and the Sacred Fig-tree was being performed by a company that had
played before the King in Paris--and when, besides all these raree
shows, a score of quacks and wizards and collar-grinners with lungs of
brass, were advertising themselves amid indescribable clanging of
drums and squeaking of trumpets, it was not to be expected that a boy
and a monkey could always hold the first place. An hour before sunset
the ladle began to come home empty. The crowd grew thin. Gargantuan
roars of laughter from the players' booth drew off some who lingered.
It seemed as if the trio's run of success was at an end; and that, for
all the profit they were still likely to make, they might pack up and
be off to bed.

But Master Crafty Eyes knew better. Before his popularity quite
flickered out he produced a folding stool. Setting it at the foot of
the tree with a grand air, which of itself was enough to arrest the
waverers, he solemnly covered it with a red cloth. This done, he
folded his arms, looked very sternly two ways at once, and raising his
hand without glancing upwards, cried, "Tenez! His Excellency the
Seigneur de Bault will have the kindness to descend."

The little handful of gapers laughed, and the laugh added to their
number. But the boy, to whom the words were addressed, did not move.
He sat idly on the rope, swaying to and fro, and looked out straight
before him, with a set face, and a mutinous glare in his eyes. He
appeared to be about twelve years old. He was lithe-limbed, and burned
brown by the sun, with a mass of black hair and, strange to say, blue
eyes. The ape sat cheek by jowl with him; and even at the sound of the
master's voice turned to him humanly, as if to say, "You had better
go."

Still he did not move. "Tenez!" Master Crafty Eyes cried again, and
more sharply. "His Excellency the Seigneur de Bault will have the
kindness to descend, and narrate his history. _Écoutez! Écoutez!
mesdames et messieurs!_ It will repay you."

This time the boy, frowning and stubborn, looked down from his perch.
He seemed to be measuring the distance, and calculating whether his
height from the ground would save him from the whip. Apparently he
came to the conclusion it would not, for on the man crying "_Vitement!
Vitement!_" and flinging a grim look upwards, he began to descend
slowly, a sullen reluctance manifest in all his movements.

On reaching the ground, he made his way through the audience--which
had increased to above a score--and climbed heavily on the stool,
where he stood looking round him with a dark shamefacedness,
surprising in one who was part of a show, and had been posturing all
day long for the public amusement. The women, quick to espy the
hollows in his cheeks, and the great wheal that seamed his neck, and
quick also to admire the straightness of his limbs and the light pose
of his head, regarded him pitifully. The men only stared; smoking had
not yet come in at Fécamp, so they munched cakes and gazed by turns.

"Oyez! Oyez! Oyez!" cried the man with the drum. "Listen to the
remarkable, lamentable, and veritable history of the Seigneur de
Bault, now before you! Oyez!"

The boy cast a look round, but there was no escape. So, sullenly, and
in a sing-song tone--through which, nevertheless, some note of
dignity, some strange echo of power and authority, that gave the
recital its bizarre charm and made it what it was, would continually
force itself--he began with the words at the head of this chapter:--

"I am Jehan de Bault, Seigneur of--I know not where, and Lord of
seventeen lordships in the County of--I forget the name, of a most
noble and puissant family, possessing the High Justice, the Middle,
and the Low. In my veins runs the blood of Roland, and of my
forefathers were three marshals of France. I stand here, the last of
my race; in token whereof may God preserve my mother, the King,
France, and this Province! I was stolen by gypsies at the age of five,
and carried off and sold by my father's steward, as Joseph was by his
brethren, and I appeal to--I appeal to--all good subjects of France
to--help me to----"

"My rights!" interjected Crafty Eyes, with a savage glance.

"My rights," the boy whispered, lowering his head.

The drum-man came forward briskly. "Just so, ladies and gentlemen," he
cried with wonderful glibness. "And seldom as it is that you have
before you the representative of one of our most noble and ancient
families a-begging your help, seldom as that remarkable, lamentable,
and veritable sight is to be seen in Fécamp, sure I am that you will
respond willingly, generously, and to the point, my lord, ladies and
gentlemen!" And with this, and a far grander air than when it had been
merely an affair of a boy and an ape, the knave carried round his
ladle, doffing his cap to each who contributed, and saying politely,
"The Sieur de Bault thanks you, sir. The Sieur de Bault is your
servant, madam."

There was something so novel in the whole business, something so odd
and inexplicably touching in the boy's words and manner, that with all
the appearance of a barefaced trick, appealing only to the most
ignorant, the thing wrought on the crowd: as doubtless it had wrought
on a hundred crowds before. The first man to whom the ladle came
grinned sheepishly and gave against his will; and his fellows
throughout maintained a position of reserve, shrugging their shoulders
and looking wisdom. But a dozen women became believers at once, and
despite the blare and flare of rival dragons and Moriscoes and the
surrounding din and hubbub, the ladle came back full of deniers and
sous.

The showman was counting his gains into his pouch, when a silver franc
spun through the air and fell at his feet, and at the same time a
harsh voice cried, "Here, you, sirrah! A word with you."

Master Crafty Eyes looked up, and doffing his cap humbly--for the
voice was a voice of authority--went cringing to the speaker. This was
an elderly man, well mounted, who had reined up his horse on the
skirts of the crowd as the boy began his harangue. He had a plain
soldier's face, with grey moustachios and a small, pointed grey beard,
and he seemed to be a person of rank on his way out of the town; for
he had two or three armed servants behind him, of whom one carried a
valise on his crupper.

"What is your will, noble sir?" the showman whined, standing
bare-headed at his stirrup and looking up at him.

"Who taught the lad that rubbish?" the horseman asked sternly.

"No one, my lord. It is the truth."

"Then bring him here, liar!" was the answer.

The showman obeyed, not very willingly, dragging the boy off the
stool, and jerking him through the crowd. The stranger looked down at
the child for a moment in silence. Then he said sharply, "Hark ye,
tell me the truth, boy. What is your name?"

The lad stood straight up, and answered without hesitation, "Jehan de
Bault."

"Of nowhere in the County of No Name," the stranger gibed gravely. "Of
a noble and puissant family--and the rest. All that is true, I
suppose?"

A flicker as of hope gleamed in the boy's eyes. His cheek reddened. He
raised his hand to the horse's shoulder, and answered in a voice which
trembled a little, "It is true."


[Illustration: "THE SHOWMAN WAS COUNTING HIS GAINS INTO HIS POUCH"
(_p_. 11).]


"Where is Bault?" the stranger asked grimly.

The lad looked puzzled and disappointed. His lip trembled, his colour
lied again. He glanced here and there, and finally shook his head. "I
do not know," he said faintly.

"Nor do I," the horseman replied, striking his long brown boot with
his riding-switch to give emphasis to the words, and looking sternly
round. "Nor do I. And what is more, you may take it from me that there
is no family of that name in France! And once more you may take this
from me too. I am the Vicomte de Bresly, and I have a government in
Guienne. Play this game in my county, and I will have you both whipped
for common cheats, and you, Master Drummer, branded as well! Bear it
in mind, sirrah; and when you perform, give Perigord a wide berth.
That is all."

He struck his horse at the last word, and rode off; sitting, like an
old soldier, so straight in his saddle that he did not see what
happened behind him, or that the boy sprang forward with a hasty cry,
and would, but for the showman's grasp, have followed him. He rode
away, unheeding and without looking back; and the boy, after a brief
passionate struggle with his master, collapsed.

"You limb!" the man with the drum cried, as he shook him. "What bee
has stung you? You won't be quiet, eh? Then take that! and that!" and
he struck the child brutally in the face--twice.

Some cried shame and some laughed. But it was nobody's business, and
there were a hundred delights within sight. What was one little boy,
or a blow more or less, amid the whirl and tumult of the fair? A score
of yards away a dancing girl, a very Peri--or so she seemed by the
light of four tallow candles--was pirouetting on a rickety platform.
Almost rubbing elbows with her was a philosopher, who had conquered
all the secrets of Nature except cleanliness, and was prepared to sell
infallible love-philtres and the potion of perpetual youth--for four
farthings! And beyond these stretched a vista of wonders and
prodigies, all vocal, not to say deafening. So one by one, with a
shrug or a sneer, the onlookers melted away, until only our trio
remained: Master Crafty Eyes counting his gains, the boy sobbing
against the bank on which he had thrown himself, and the monkey
gibbering and chattering overhead--a dark shapeless object on an
invisible rope. For night was falling: where the fun of the fair was
not were gloom and a rising wind, lurking cutpurses, and waste land.

The showman seemed to feel this, for having counted his takings, he
kicked up the boy and began to pack up. He had nearly finished, and
was stooping over the coil of rope, securing the end, when a touch on
his shoulder caused him to jump a yard. A tall man wrapped in a cloak,
who had come up unseen, stood at his elbow.

"Well!" the showman cried, striving to hide his alarm under an
appearance of bluster. "And what may you want?"

"A word with you," the unknown answered.

The voice was so cold and passionless it gave Crafty Eyes a turn.
"Diable!" he muttered, striving to pierce the darkness and see what
the other was like. But he could not; so as to shake off the
impression, he asked, with a sneer, "You are not a vicomte, are you?"

"No," the stranger replied gravely, "I am not."

"Nor the governor of a county?"

"No."

"Then you may speak!" rejoined the showman grandly.

"Not here," the cloaked man answered. "I must see you alone."

"Then you will have to come home with me, and wait until I have put up
the boy," the other said. "I am not going to lose him for you or
anyone. And for a penny he'd be off! Does it suit you? You may take it
or leave it."

The unknown, whose features were completely masked by the dusk, nodded
assent, and without more ado the four turned their faces towards the
streets; the boy carrying the monkey, and the two men following close
on his heels. Whenever they passed before a lighted booth the showman
strove to learn something of his companion's appearance but the latter
wore his cloak so high about his face, and was so well served by a
wide-flapped hat which almost met it, that curiosity was completely
baffled; and they reached the low inn where the showman rented a
corner of the stable without that cunning gentleman being a jot the
wiser for his pains.

It was a vile, evil-smelling place they entered, divided into six or
eight stalls by wooden partitions reaching half-way to the tiles. A
horn lantern hung at each end filled it with yellow lights and deep
shadows. A pony raised its head and whinnied as the men entered, but
most of the stalls were empty, or tenanted only by drunken clowns
sleeping in the straw.

"You cannot lock him in here," said the stranger, looking round him.

The showman grunted. "Cannot I?" he said. "There are tricks in all
trades, master. I reckon I can--with this!" And producing from
somewhere about him a thin steel chain, he held it before the other's
face. "That is my lock and door," he said triumphantly.

"It won't hold him long," the other answered impassively. "The fifth
link from the end is worn through now."

"You have sharp eyes!" the showman exclaimed, with reluctant
admiration. "But it will hold a bit yet. I fasten him in yonder
corner. Do you wait here, and I will come back to you."

He was not long about it. When he returned he led the stranger into
the farthest of the stalls, which, as well as that next to it, was
empty. "We can talk here," he said bluntly. "At any rate, I have no
better place. The house is full. Now, what is it?"

"I want that boy," the tall man answered. The showman laughed--stopped
laughing--laughed again. "I dare say you do," he said derisively.
"There is not a better or a pluckier boy on the rope out of Paris. And
for patter? There is nothing on the road like the bit he did this
afternoon, nor a bit that pays as well."

"Who taught it him?" the stranger asked.

"I did."

"That is a lie," the other answered in a perfectly unmoved tone. "If
you like I will tell you what you did. You taught him the latter half
of the story. The other he knew before: down to the word 'province.'"

The showman gasped. "Diable!" he muttered. "Who told you?"

"Never mind. You bought the boy. From whom?"

"From some gypsies at the great fair of Beaucaire," the showman
answered sullenly.

"Who is he?"

Crafty Eyes laughed dryly. "If I knew I should not be padding the
hoof," he said. "Or, again, he may be nobody, and the tale patter. You
have heard as much as I have. What do you think?"

"I think I shall find out when I have bought the boy," the stranger
answered coolly. "What will you take for him?"

The showman gasped again. "You come to the point," he said.

"It is my custom. What is his price?"

The showman's imagination had never soared beyond nor his ears ever
heard of a larger sum than a thousand crowns. He mentioned it
trembling. There might be such a sum in the world.

"A thousand livres, if you like. Not a sou more," was the answer.

The nearer lantern threw a strong light on Crafty Eyes' face; but that
was mere shadow beside the light of cupidity which sparkled in his
eyes. He could get another boy; scores of boys. But a thousand livres!
A thousand livres! "Tournois!" he said faintly. "Livres Tournois!" In
his wildest moments of avarice he had never dreamed of possessing such
a sum.

"No, Paris livres," the stranger answered coldly. "Paid to-morrow at
the _Golden Chariot_. If you agree, you will deliver the boy to me
there at noon, and receive the money."

The showman nodded, vanquished by the mere sound of the sum. Paris
livres let it be. Danae did not more quickly succumb to the golden
shower.




                             CHAPTER II.

                          SOLOMON NÔTREDAME.


A little later that night, at the hour which saw the showman pay his
second visit to the street before the _Chariot d'Or_, there to stand
gaping at the lighted windows, and peering into the courtyard in a
kind of fascination--or perhaps to assure himself that the house would
not fly away, and his golden hopes with it--the twelve-year-old boy,
the basis of those hopes, awoke and stirred restlessly in the straw.
He was cold, and the chain galled him. His face ached where the man
had struck him. In the next stall two drunken men were fighting, and
the place reeked with oaths and foulness. But none of these things
were so novel as to keep the boy awake; and sighing and drawing the
monkey nearer to him, he would in a moment have been asleep again if
the moon, shining with great brightness through the little square
aperture above him, had not thrown its light directly on his head, and
roused him more completely.

He sat up and gazed at it, and God knows what softening thoughts and
pitiful recollections the beauty of the night brought into his mind;
but presently he began to weep--not as a child cries, with noise and
wailing, but in silence, as a man weeps. The monkey awoke and crept
into his breast, but he hardly regarded it. The misery, the
hopelessness, the slavery of his life, ignored from hour to hour, or
borne at other times with a boy's nonchalance, filled his heart to
bursting now. Crouching in his lair in the straw, he shook with agony.
The tears welled up, and would not be restrained, until they hid the
face of the sky and darkened even the moon's pure light.

Or was it his tears? He dashed them away and looked, and rose slowly
to his feet; while the ape, clinging to his breast, began to mow and
gibber. A black mass, which gradually resolved itself, as the boy's
eyes cleared, into a man's hat and head, filled the aperture.

"Hush!" came from the head in a cautious whisper. "Come nearer. I will
not hurt you. Do you wish to escape, lad?"

The boy clasped his hands in an ecstasy. "Yes, oh yes!" he murmured.
The question chimed in so naturally with his thoughts, it scarcely
surprised him.

"If you were loose, could you get through this window?" the man asked.
He spoke cautiously, under his breath; but the noise in the next
stall, to say nothing of a vile drinking song which was being chanted
forth at the farther end of the stable, was such he might safely have
shouted. "Yes? Then take this file. Rub at the fifth link from the
end: the one that is nearly through. Do you understand, boy?"

"Yes, yes," Jehan cried again, groping in the straw for the tool,
which had fallen at his feet. "I know."

"When you are loose, cover up the chain," continued the other in a
slow biting tone. "Or lie on that part of it, and wait until morning.
As soon as you see the first gleam of light, climb out through the
window. You will find me outside."

The boy would have uttered his trembling thanks. But lo! in a moment
the aperture was clear again; the moon sailed unchanged through an
unchanged sky; and all was as before. Save for the presence of the
little bit of rough steel in his hand, he might have thought it a
dream. But the file was there; it was there, and with a choking sob of
hope and fear and excitement, he fell to work on the chain.

It was clumsy work he made of it in the dark. But the link was so much
worn, a man might have wrenched it open, and the boy did not spare his
fingers. The dispute next door covered the song of the file; and the
smoky horn lantern which alone lighted that end of the stable had no
effect in the dark corner where he lay. True, he had to work by feel,
looking out all the while for his tyrant's coming; but the tool was
good, and the fingers, hardened by many an hour of work on the rope,
were strong and lithe. When the showman at last stumbled to his place
in the straw, the boy lay free--free and trembling.

All was not done, however. It seemed an hour before the man settled
himself--an hour of agony and suspense to Jehan, feigning sleep; since
at any moment his master might take it into his head to look into
things. But Crafty Eyes had no suspicion. Having kicked the boy and
heard the chain rattle, and so assured himself that he was there--so
much caution he exercised every night, drunk or sober--he was
satisfied; and by-and-by, when his imagination, heated by thoughts of
wealth, permitted it, he fell asleep, and dreamed that he had married
the Cardinal's cook-maid and ate collops on Sundays.

Even so, the night seemed endless to the boy, lying wakeful, with his
eyes on the sky. Now he was hot, now cold. One moment the thought that
the window might prove too strait for him threw him into a bath of
perspiration; the next he shuddered at the possibility of re-capture,
and saw himself dragged back and flayed by his brutal owner. But a
watched pot _does_ boil, though slowly. The first streak of dawn came
at last--as it does when the sky is darkest; and with it, even as the
boy rose warily to his feet, the sound of a faint whistle outside the
window.

A common mortal could no more have passed through that window without
noise than an old man can make himself young again. But the boy did
it. As he dropped to the ground outside he heard the whistle again.
The air was still dark; but a score of paces away, beyond a low wall,
he made out the form of a horseman, and went towards it.

It was the man in the cloak, who stooped and held out his hand. "Jump
up behind me," he muttered.

The boy went to obey, but as he clasped the outstretched hand, it was
suddenly withdrawn. "What is that? What have you got there?" the rider
exclaimed, peering down at him.

"It is only Taras, the monkey," Jehan said timidly.

"Throw it away," the stranger answered. "Do you hear me?" he continued
in a stern, composed tone. "Throw it away, I say."

The boy stood hesitating a moment; then, without a word, he turned and
fled into the darkness the way he had come. The man on the horse swore
under his breath, but he had no remedy; and before he could tell what
to expect, the boy was at his side again. "I've put it through the
window," Jehan explained breathlessly. "If I had left it here, the
dogs and the boys would have killed it."

The man made no comment aloud, but jerked him roughly to the crupper;
and bidding him hold fast, started the horse, which, setting off at an
easy amble, quickly bore them out of Fécamp. As they passed through
the fair-ground of yesterday--a shadowy, ghastly waste at this hour,
peopled by wandering asses, and packhorses, and a few lurking figures
that leapt up out of the darkness, and ran after them whining for
alms--the boy shivered and clung close to his protector. But he had no
more than recognised the scene before they were out of sight of it,
and riding through the open fields. The grey dawn was spreading, the
cocks at distant farms were crowing. The dim, misty countryside, the
looming trees, the raw air, the chill that crept into his ill-covered
bones--all these, which might have seemed to others wretched
conditions enough, filled the boy with hope and gladness. For they
meant freedom.

But presently, as they rode on, his thoughts took a fresh turn. They
began to busy themselves, and fearfully, with the man before him,
whose continued silence and cold reserve set a hundred wild ideas
humming in his brain. What manner of man was he? Who was he? Why had
he helped him? Jehan had heard of ogres and giants that decoyed
children into forests and devoured them. He had listened to ballads of
such adventures, sung at fairs and in the streets, a hundred times;
now they came so strongly into his mind, and so grew upon him in this
grim companionship, that by-and-by, seeing a wood before them through
which the road ran, he shook with terror and gave himself up for lost.
Sure enough, when they came to the wood, and had ridden a little way
into it, the man, whose face he had never seen, stopped. "Get down,"
he said sternly.


[Illustration: "JEHAN WENT TREMBLING AND FOUND THE HOLE" (_p_. 33).]


Jehan obeyed, his teeth chattering, his legs quaking under him. He
expected the man to produce a large carving-knife, or call some of his
fellows out of the forest to share his repast. Instead, the stranger
made a queer pass with his hands over his horse's neck, and bade the
boy go to an old stump which stood by the way. "There is a hole in the
farther side of it," he said. "Look in the hole."

Jehan went trembling and found the hole, and looked. "What do you
see?" the rider asked.

"A piece of money," said Jehan.

"Bring it to me," the stranger answered gravely.

The boy took it--it was only a copper sou--and did as he was bidden.
"Get up!" said the horseman curtly. Jehan obeyed, and they went on as
before.

When they had ridden half-way through the forest, however, the
stranger stopped again. "Get down," he said.

The boy obeyed, and was directed as on the former occasion--but not
until the horseman had made the same strange gesture with his
hands--to go to an old stump. This time he found a silver livre. He
gave it to his master, and climbed again to his place, marvelling
much.

A third time they stopped, on the farther verge of the forest. The
same words passed, but this time the boy found a gold crown in the
hole.

After that his mind no longer ran upon ogres and giants. Instead,
another fancy almost as dreadful took possession of him. He remarked
that everything the stranger wore was black: his cloak, his hat, his
gauntlets. Even his long boots, which in those days were commonly made
of untanned leather, were black. So was the furniture of the horse.
Jehan noticed this as he mounted the third time; and connecting it
with the marvellous springing up of money where the man willed, began
to be seized with panic, never doubting but that he had fallen into
the hands of the devil. Likely enough, he would have dropped off at
the first opportunity that offered, and fled for his life--or his
soul, but he did not know much of that--if the stranger had not in the
nick of time drawn a parcel of food from his saddle-bag. He gave some
to Jehan. Even so, the boy, hungry as he was, did not dare to touch it
until he was assured that his companion was really eating--eating, and
not pretending. Then, with a great sigh of relief, he began to eat
too. For he knew that the devil never ate!

After this they rode on in silence, until, about an hour before noon,
they came to a small farm-steading standing by the road, half a league
short of the sleepy old town of Yvetot, which Beranger was one day to
celebrate. Here the magician--for such Jehan now took his companion to
be--stopped. "Get down," he said.

The boy obeyed, and instinctively looked for a stump. But there was no
stump, and this time his master, after scanning his ragged garments as
if to assure himself of his appearance, had a different order to give.
"Go to that farm," he said. "Knock at the door, and say that Solomon
Nôtredame de Paris requires two fowls. They will give them to you.
Bring them to me."

The boy went wide-eyed, knocked, and gave his message. A woman, who
opened the door, stretched out her hand, took up a couple of fowls
that lay tied together on the hearth, and gave them to him without a
word. He took them--he no longer wondered at anything--and carried
them back to his master in the road.

"Now listen to me," said the latter, in his slow, cold tone. "Go into
the town you see before you, and in the market-place you will find an
inn with the sign of the _Three Pigeons_. Enter the yard and offer
these fowls for sale, but ask a livre apiece for them, that they may
not be bought. While offering them, make an excuse to go into the
stable, where you will see a grey horse. Drop this white lump into the
horse's manger when no one is looking, and afterwards remain at the
door of the yard. If you see me, do not speak to me. Do you
understand?"

Jehan said he did; but his new master made him repeat his orders from
beginning to end before he let him go with the fowls and the white
lump, which was about the size of a walnut, and looked like rock-salt.

About an hour later the landlord of the _Three Pigeons_ at Yvetot
heard a horseman stop at his door. He went out to meet him. Now,
Yvetot is on the road to Havre and Harfleur; and though the former of
these places was then in the making and the latter was dying fast, the
landlord had had experience of many guests. But so strange a guest as
the one he found awaiting him he thought he had never seen. In the
first place, the gentleman was clad from top to toe in black; and
though he had no servants behind him, he wore an air of as grave
consequence as though he boasted six. In the next place, his face was
so long, thin, and cadaverous that, but for a great black line of
eyebrows that cut it in two and gave it a very curious and sinister
expression, people meeting him for the first time might have been
tempted to laugh. Altogether, the landlord could not make him out; but
he thought it safer to go out and hold his stirrup, and ask his
pleasure.

"I shall dine here," the stranger answered gravely. As he dismounted
his cloak fell open. The landlord observed with growing wonder that
its black lining was sprinkled with cabalistic figures embroidered in
white.

Introduced to the public room, which was over the great stone porch
and happened to be empty, the traveller lost none of his singularity.
He paused a little way within the door, and stood as if suddenly
fallen into deep thought. The landlord, beginning to think him mad,
ventured to recall him by asking what his honour would take.

"There is something amiss in this house," the stranger replied
abruptly, turning his eyes on him.

"Amiss?" the host answered, faltering under his gaze, and wishing
himself well out of the room. "Not that I am aware of, your honour."

"There is no one ill?"

"No, your honour, certainly not."

"Nor deformed?"

"No."

"You are mistaken," the stranger answered firmly. "Know that I am
Solomon, son to Cæsar, son to Michel Nôtredame of Paris, commonly
called by the learned Nostradamus and the Transcendental, who read the
future and rode the Great White Horse of Death. All things hidden are
open to me."

The landlord only gaped, but his wife and a serving wench, who had
come to the door out of curiosity, and were listening and staring with
all their might, crossed themselves industriously. "I am here," the
stranger continued, after a brief pause, "to construct the horoscope
of His Eminence the Cardinal, of whom it has been predicted that he
will die at Yvetot. But I find the conditions unpropitious. There is
an adverse influence in this house."

The landlord scratched his head, and looked helplessly at his wife.
But she was quite taken up with awe of the stranger, whose head nearly
touched the ceiling of the low room; while his long, pale face seemed
in the obscurity--for the day was dark--to be of an unearthly pallor.

"An adverse influence," the astrologer continued gravely. "What is
more, I now see where it is. It is in the stable. You have a grey
horse."

The landlord, somewhat astonished, said he had.

"You had. You have not now. The devil has it!" was the astounding
answer.

"My grey horse?"

The stranger inclined his head.

"Nay, there you are wrong!" the host retorted briskly. "I'm hanged if
he has! For I rode the horse this morning, and it went as well and
quietly as ever in its life."

"Send and see," the tall man answered.

The serving girl, obeying a nod, went off reluctantly to the stable,
while her master, casting a look of misliking at his guest, walked
uneasily to the window. In a moment the girl came back, her face
white. "The grey is in a fit," she cried, keeping the whole width of
the room between her and the stranger. "It is sweating and
staggering."

The landlord, with an oath, ran off to see, and in a minute the
appearance of an excited group in the square under the window showed
that the thing was known. The traveller took no notice of this,
however, nor of the curious and reverential glances which the
womenfolk, huddled about the door of the room, cast at him. He walked
up and down the room with his eyes lowered.

The landlord came back presently, his face black as thunder. "It has
got the staggers," he said resentfully.

"It has got the devil," the stranger answered coldly. "I knew it was
in the house when I entered. If you doubt me, I will prove it."

"Ay?" said the landlord stubbornly.

The man in black went to his saddle-bag, which had been brought up and
laid in a corner, and took out a shallow glass bowl, curiously
embossed with a cross and some mystic symbols. "Go to the church
there," he said, "and fill this with holy water."

The host took it unwillingly, and went on his strange errand. While he
was away the astrologer opened the window, and looked out idly. When
he saw the other returning, he gave the order "Lead out the horse."

There was a brief delay, but presently two stablemen, with a little
posse of wondering attendants, partly urged and partly led out a
handsome grey horse. The poor animal trembled and hung its head, but
with some difficulty was brought under the window. Now and again a
sharp spasm convulsed its limbs, and scattered the spectators right
and left.

Solomon Nôtredame leaned out of the window. In his left hand he held
the bowl, in his right a small brush. "If this beast is sick with any
earthly sickness," he cried in a deep solemn voice, audible across the
square, "or with such as earthly skill can cure, then let this holy
water do it no harm, but refresh it. But if it be possessed by the
devil, and given up to the powers of darkness and to the enemy of man
for ever and ever to do his will and pleasure, then let these drops
burn and consume it as with fire. Amen! Amen!"

With the last word he sprinkled the horse. The effect was magical. The
animal reared up, as if it had been furiously spurred, and plunged so
violently that the men who held it were dragged this way and that. The
crowd fled every way; but not so quickly but that a hundred eyes had
seen the horse smoke where the water fell on it. Moreover, when they
cautiously approached it, the hair in two or three places was found to
be burned off!

The magician turned gravely from the window. "I wish to eat," he said.

None of the servants, however, would come into the room or serve him,
and the landlord, trembling, set the board with his own hands and
waited on him. Mine host had begun by doubting and suspecting, but,
simple man! his scepticism was not proof against the holy water trial
and his wife's terror. By-and-by, with a sidelong glance at his guest,
he faltered the question: What should he do with the horse?

The man in black looked solemn. "Whoever mounts it will die within the
year," he said.

"I will shoot it," the landlord replied, shuddering.

"The devil will pass into one of the other horses," was the answer.

"Then," said the miserable innkeeper, "perhaps your honour would
accept it?"

"God forbid!" the astrologer answered. And that frightened the other
more than all the rest. "But if you can find at any time," the wizard
continued, "a beggar-boy with black hair and blue eyes, who does not
know his father's name, he may take the horse and break the spell. So
I read the signs."

The landlord cried out that such a person was not to be met with in a
lifetime. But before he had well finished his sentence a shrill voice
called through the keyhole that there was such a boy in the yard at
that moment, offering poultry for sale.

"In God's name, then, give him the horse!" the stranger said. "Bid him
take it to Rouen, and at every running water he comes to say a
paternoster and sprinkle its tail. So he may escape, and you, too. I
know no other way."
