
"I have just sent for the doctor," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"I am very well; what do I want the doctor for?"

"No, the little one cries, and they say the nurse hasn't enough
milk."

"Why didn't you let me nurse her, when I begged to?  Anyway"
(Alexey Alexandrovitch knew what was meant by that "anyway"),
"she's a baby, and they're killing her."  She rang the bell and
ordered the baby to be brought her.  "I begged to nurse her, I
wasn't allowed to, and now I'm blamed for it."

"I don't blame..."

"Yes, you do blame me!  My God! why didn't I die!"  And she broke
into sobs.  "Forgive me, I'm nervous, I'm unjust," she said,
controlling herself, "but do go away..."

"No, it can't go on like this," Alexey Alexandrovitch said to
himself decidedly as he left his wife's room.

Never had the impossibility of his position in the world's eyes,
and his wife's hatred of him, and altogether the might of that
mysterious brutal force that guided his life against his
spiritual inclinations, and exacted conformity with its decrees
and change in his attitude to his wife, been presented to him
with such distinctness as that day.  He saw clearly that all the
world and his wife expected of him something, but what exactly,
he could not make out.  He felt that this was rousing in his soul
a feeling of anger destructive of his peace of mind and of all
the good of his achievement.  He believed that for Anna herself
it would be better to break off all relations with Vronsky; but
if they all thought this out of the question, he was even ready
to allow these relations to be renewed, so long as the children
were not disgraced, and he was not deprived of them nor forced to
change his position.  Bad as this might be, it was anyway better
than a rupture, which would put her in a hopeless and shameful
position, and deprive him of everything he cared for.  But he
felt helpless; he knew beforehand that every one was against him,
and that he would not be allowed to do what seemed to him now so
natural and right, but would be forced to do what was wrong,
though it seemed the proper thing to them.



Chapter 21


Before Betsy had time to walk out of the drawing-room, she was
met in the doorway by Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just come from
Yeliseev's, where a consignment of fresh oysters had been
received.

"Ah! princess! what a delightful meeting!" he began.  "I've been
to see you."

"A meeting for one minute, for I'm going," said Betsy, smiling
and putting on her glove.

"Don't put on your glove yet, princess; let me kiss your hand.
There's nothing I'm so thankful to the revival of the old
fashions for as the kissing the hand." He kissed Betsy's hand.
"When shall we see each other?"

"You don't deserve it," answered Betsy, smiling.

"Oh, yes, I deserve a great deal, for I've become a most serious
person.  I don't only manage my own affairs, but other people's
too," he said, with a significant expression.

"Oh, I'm so glad!" answered Betsy, at once understanding that he
was speaking of Anna.  And going back into the drawing room, they
stood in a corner.  "He's killing her," said Betsy in a whisper
full of meaning.  "It's impossible, impossible..."

"I'm so glad you think so," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, shaking his
head with a serious and sympathetically distressed expression,
"that's what I've come to Petersburg for."

"The whole town's talking of it," she said.  "It's an impossible
position.  She pines and pines away.  He doesn't understand that
she's one of those women who can't trifle with their feelings.
One of two things: either let him take her away, act with
energy, or give her a divorce.  This is stifling her."

"Yes, yes...just so..." Oblonsky said, sighing.  "That's what
I've come for.  At least not solely for that...I've been made a
_Kammerherr_; of course, one has to say thank you.  But the chief
thing was having to settle this."

"Well, God help you!" said Betsy.

After accompanying Betsy to the outside hall, once more kissing
her hand above the glove, at the point where the pulse beats, and
murmuring to her such unseemly nonsense that she did not know
whether to laugh or be angry, Stepan Arkadyevitch went to his
sister.  He found her in tears.

Although he happened to be bubbling over with good spirits,
Stepan Arkadyevitch immediately and quite naturally fell into the
sympathetic, poetically emotional tone which harmonized with her
mood.  He asked her how she was, and how she had spent the
morning.

"Very, very miserably.  Today and this morning and all past days
and days to come," she said.

"I think you're giving way to pessimism.  You must rouse
yourself, you must look life in the face.  I know it's hard,
but..."

"I have heard it said that women love men even for their vices,"
Anna began suddenly, "but I hate him for his virtues.  I can't
live with him.  Do you understand? the sight of him has a
physical effect on me, it makes me beside myself.  I can't, I
can't live with him.  What am I to do?  I have been unhappy, and
used to think one couldn't be more unhappy, but the awful state
of things I am going through now, I could never have conceived.
Would you believe it, that knowing he's a good man, a splendid
man, that I'm not worth his little finger, still I hate him.  I
hate him for his generosity.  And there's nothing left for me
but..."

She would have said death, but Stepan Arkadyevitch would not let
her finish.

"You are ill and overwrought," he said; "believe me, you're
exaggerating dreadfully.  There's nothing so terrible in it."

And Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled.  No one else in Stepan
Arkadyevitch's place, having to do with such despair, would have
ventured to smile (the smile would have seemed brutal); but in
his smile there was so much of sweetness and almost feminine
tenderness that his smile did not wound, but softened and
soothed.  His gentle, soothing words and smiles were as soothing
and softening as almond oil.  And Anna soon felt this.

"No, Stiva," she said, "I'm lost, lost! worse than lost! I can't
say yet that all is over; on the contrary, I feel that it's not
over.  I'm an overstrained string that must snap.  But it's not
ended yet...and it will have a fearful end."

"No matter, we must let the string be loosened, little by little.
There's no position from which there is no way of escape."

"I have thought, and thought.  Only one..."

Again he knew from her terrified eyes that this one way of escape
in her thought was death, and he would not let her say it.

"Not at all," he said.  "Listen to me.  You can't see your own
position as I can.  Let me tell you candidly my opinion." Again
he smiled discreetly his almond-oil smile.  "I'll begin from the
beginning.  You married a man twenty years older than yourself.
You married him without love and not knowing what love was.  It
was a mistake, let's admit."

"A fearful mistake!" said Anna.

"But I repeat, it's an accomplished fact.  Then you had, let us
say, the misfortune to love a man not your husband.  That was a
misfortune; but that, too, is an accomplished fact.  And your
husband knew it and forgave it."  He stopped at each sentence,
waiting for her to object, but she made no answer.  "That's so.
Now the question is: can you go on living with your husband?  Do
you wish it?  Does he wish it?"

"I know nothing, nothing."

"But you said yourself that you can't endure him."

"No, I didn't say so.  I deny it.  I can't tell, I don't know
anything about it."

"Yes, but let..."

"You can't understand.  I feel I'm lying head downwards in a sort
of pit, but I ought not to save myself.  And I can't . . ."

"Never mind, we'll slip something under and pull you out.  I
understand you: I understand that you can't take it on yourself
to express your wishes, your feelings."

"There's nothing, nothing I wish...except for it to be all
over."

"But he sees this and knows it.  And do you suppose it weighs on
him any less than on you?  You're wretched, he's wretched, and
what good can come of it? while divorce would solve the
difficulty completely."  With some effort Stepan Arkadyevitch
brought out his central idea, and looked significantly at her.

She said nothing, and shook her cropped head in dissent.  But
from the look in her face, that suddenly brightened into its old
beauty, he saw that if she did not desire this, it was simply
because it seemed to her unattainable happiness.

"I'm awfully sorry for you!  And how happy I should be if I could
arrange things!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling more boldly.
"Don't speak, don't say a word!  God grant only that I may speak
as I feel.  I'm going to him."

Anna looked at him with dreamy, shining eyes, and said nothing.



Chapter 22


Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the same somewhat solemn expression
with which he used to take his presidential chair at his board,
walked into Alexey Alexandrovitch's room.  Alexey Alexandrovitch
was walking about his room with his hands behind his back,
thinking of just what Stepan Arkadyevitch had been discussing
with his wife.

"I'm not interrupting you?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch, on the
sight of his brother-in-law becoming suddenly aware of a sense of
embarrassment unusual with him.  To conceal this embarrassment he
took out a cigarette case he had just bought that opened in a new
way, and sniffing the leather, took a cigarette out of it.

"No.  Do you want anything?" Alexey Alexandrovitch asked without
eagerness.

"Yes, I wished...I wanted...yes, I wanted to talk to you," said
Stepan Arkadyevitch, with surprise aware of an unaccustomed
timidity.

This feeling was so unexpected and so strange that he did not
believe it was the voice of conscience telling him that what he
was meaning to do was wrong.

Stepan Arkadyevitch made an effort and struggled with the
timidity that had come over him.

"I hope you believe in my love for my sister and my sincere
affection and respect for you," he said, reddening.

Alexey Alexandrovitch stood still and said nothing, but his face
struck Stepan Arkadyevitch by its expression of an unresisting
sacrifice.

"I intended...I wanted to have a little talk with you about my
sister and your mutual position," he said, still struggling with
an unaccustomed constraint.

Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled mournfully, looked at his
brother-in-law, and without answering went up to the table, took
from it an unfinished letter, and handed it to his
brother-in-law.

"I think unceasingly of the same thing.  And here is what I had
begun writing, thinking I could say it better by letter, and
that my presence irritates her," he said, as he gave him the
letter.

Stepan Arkadyevitch took the letter, looked with incredulous
surprise at the lusterless eyes fixed so immovably on him, and
began to read.

"I see that my presence is irksome to you.  Painful as it is to
me to believe it, I see that it is so, and cannot be otherwise.
I don't blame you, and God is my witness that on seeing you at
the time of your illness I resolved with my whole heart to forget
all that had passed between us and to begin a new life.  I do not
regret, and shall never regret, what I have done; but I have
desired one thing--your good, the good of your soul--and now I
see I have not attained that.  Tell me yourself what will give
you true happiness and peace to your soul.  I put myself entirely
in your hands, and trust to your feeling of what's right."

Stepan Arkadyevitch handed back the letter, and with the same
surprise continued looking at his brother-in-law, not knowing
what to say.  This silence was so awkward for both of them that
Stepan Arkadyevitch's lips began twitching nervously, while he
still gazed without speaking at Karenin's face.

"That's what I wanted to say to her," said Alexey Alexandrovitch,
turning away.

"Yes, yes..." said Stepan Arkadyevitch, not able to answer for
the tears that were choking him.

"Yes, yes, I understand you," he brought out at last.

"I want to know what she would like," said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"I am afraid she does not understand her own position.  She is
not a judge," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, recovering himself.  "She
is crushed, simply crushed by your generosity.  If she were to
read this letter, she would be incapable of saying anything, she
would only hang her head lower than ever."

"Yes, but what's to be done in that case? how explain, how find
out her wishes?"

"If you will allow me to give my opinion, I think that it lies
with you to point out directly the steps you consider necessary
to end the position."

"So you consider it must be ended?" Alexey Alexandrovitch
interrupted him.  "But how?" he added, with a gesture of his
hands before his eyes not usual with him.  "I see no possible way
out of it."

"There is some way of getting out of every position," said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, standing up and becoming more cheerful.  "There was
a time when you thought of breaking off....  If you are convinced
now that you cannot make each other happy..."

"Happiness may be variously understood.  But suppose that I agree
to everything, that I want nothing: what way is there of getting
out of our position?"

"If you care to know my opinion," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with
the same smile of softening, almond-oil tenderness with which he
had been talking to Anna.  His kindly smile was so winning that
Alexey Alexandrovitch, feeling his own weakness and unconsciously
swayed by it, was ready to believe what Stepan Arkadyevitch was
saying.

"She will never speak out about it.  But one thing is possible,
one thing she might desire," he went on, "that is the cessation
of your relations and all memories associated with them.  To my
thinking, in your position what's essential is the formation of a
new attitude to one another.  And that can only rest on a basis
of freedom on both sides."

"Divorce," Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted, in a tone of
aversion.

"Yes, I imagine that divorce--yes, divorce," Stepan Arkadyevitch
repeated, reddening.  "That is from every point of view the most
rational course for married people who find themselves in the
position you are in.  What can be done if married people find
that life is impossible for them together?  That may always
happen."

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed heavily and closed his eyes.

"There's only one point to be considered: is either of the
parties desirous of forming new ties?  If not, it is very
simple," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, feeling more and more free
from constraint.

Alexey Alexandrovitch, scowling with emotion, muttered something
to himself, and made no answer.  All that seemed so simple to
Stepan Arkadyevitch, Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought over
thousands of times.  And, so far from being simple, it all seemed
to him utterly impossible.  Divorce, the details of which he knew
by this time, seemed to him now out of the question, because the
sense of his own dignity and respect for religion forbade his
taking upon himself a fictitious charge of adultery, and still
more suffering his wife, pardoned and beloved by him, to be
caught in the fact and put to public shame.  Divorce appeared to
him impossible also on other still more weighty grounds.

What would become of his son in case of a divorce?  To leave him
with his mother was out of the question.  The divorced mother
would have her own illegitimate family, in which his position as
a stepson and his education would not be good.  Keep him with
him?  He knew that would be an act of vengeance on his part, and
that he did not want.  But apart from this, what more than all
made divorce seem impossible to Alexey Alexandrovitch was, that
by consenting to a divorce he would be completely ruining Anna.
The saying of Darya Alexandrovna at Moscow, that in deciding on a
divorce he was thinking of himself, and not considering that by
this he would be ruining her irrevocably, had sunk into his
heart.  And connecting this saying with his forgiveness of her,
with his devotion to the children, he understood it now in his
own way.  To consent to a divorce, to give her her freedom, meant
in his thoughts to take from himself the last tie that bound him
to life--the children whom he loved; and to take from her the
last prop that stayed her on the path of right, to thrust her
down to her ruin.  If she were divorced, he knew she would join
her life to Vronsky's, and their tie would be an illegitimate and
criminal one, since a wife, by the interpretation of the
ecclesiastical law, could not marry while her husband was living.
"She will join him, and in a year or two he will throw her over,
or she will form a new tie," thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.  "And
I, by agreeing to an unlawful divorce, shall be to blame for her
ruin."  He had thought it all over hundreds of times, and was
convinced that a divorce was not at all simple, as Stepan
Arkadyevitch had said, but was utterly impossible.  He did not
believe a single word Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him; to every
word he had a thousand objections to make, but he listened to
him, feeling that his words were the expression of that mighty
brutal force which controlled his life and to which he would have
to submit.

"The only question is on what terms you agree to give her a
divorce.  She does not want anything, does not dare ask you for
anything, she leaves it all to your generosity."

"My God, my God! what for?" thought Alexey Alexandrovitch,
remembering the details of divorce proceedings in which the
husband took the blame on himself, and with just the same gesture
with which Vronsky had done the same, he hid his face for shame
in his hands.

"You are distressed, I understand that.  But if you think it
over..."

"Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the
other also; and if any man take away thy coat, let him have thy
cloak also," thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.

"Yes, yes!" he cried in a shrill voice.  "I will take the
disgrace on myself, I will give up even my son, but...but
wouldn't it be better to let it alone?  Still you may do as you
like..."

And turning away so that his brother-in-law could not see him, he
sat down on a chair at the window.  There was bitterness, there
was shame in his heart, but with bitterness and shame he felt joy
and emotion at the height of his own meekness.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was touched.  He was silent for a space.

"Alexey Alexandrovitch, believe me, she appreciates your
generosity," he said.  "But it seems it was the will of God," he
added, and as he said it felt how foolish a remark it was, and
with difficulty repressed a smile at his own foolishness.

Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made some reply, but tears
stopped him.

"This is an unhappy fatality, and one must accept it as such.  I
accept the calamity as an accomplished fact, and am doing my best
to help both her and you," said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

When he went out of his brother-in-law's room he was touched, but
that did not prevent him from being glad he had successfully
brought the matter to a conclusion, for he felt certain Alexey
Alexandrovitch would not go back on his words.  To this
satisfaction was added the fact that an idea had just struck him
for a riddle turning on his successful achievement, that when the
affair was over he would ask his wife and most intimate friends.
He put this riddle into two or three different ways.  "But I'll
work it out better than that," he said to himself with a smile.



Chapter 23


Vronsky's wound had been a dangerous one, though it did not
touch the heart, and for several days he had lain between life
and death.  The first time he was able to speak, Varya, his
brother's wife, was alone in the room.

"Varya," he said, looking sternly at her, "I shot myself by
accident.  And please never speak of it, and tell everyone so.
Or else it's too ridiculous."

Without answering his words, Varya bent over him, and with a
delighted smile gazed into his face.  His eyes were clear, not
feverish; but their expression was stern.

"Thank God!" she said.  "You're not in pain?"

"A little here."  He pointed to his breast.

"Then let me change your bandages."

In silence, stiffening his broad jaws, he looked at her while she
bandaged him up.  When she had finished he said:

"I'm not delirious.  Please manage that there may be no talk of
my having shot myself on purpose."

"No one does say so.  Only I hope you won't shoot yourself by
accident any more," she said, with a questioning smile.

"Of course I won't, but it would have been better..."

And he smiled gloomily.

In spite of these words and this smile, which so frightened
Varya, when the inflammation was over and he began to recover, he
felt that he was completely free from one part of his misery.  By
his action he had, as it were, washed away the shame and
humiliation he had felt before.  He could now think calmly of
Alexey Alexandrovitch.  He recognized all his magnanimity, but he
did not now feel himself humiliated by it.  Besides, he got back
again into the beaten track of his life.  He saw the possibility
of looking men in the face again without shame, and he could live
in accordance with his own habits.  One thing he could not pluck
out of his heart, though he never ceased struggling with it, was
the regret, amounting to despair, that he had lost her forever.
That now, having expiated his sin against the husband, he was
bound to renounce her, and never in future to stand between her
with her repentance and her husband, he had firmly decided in his
heart; but he could not tear out of his heart his regret at the
loss of her love, he could not erase from his memory those
moments of happiness that he had so little prized at the time,
and that haunted him in all their charm.

Serpuhovskoy had planned his appointment at Tashkend, and Vronsky
agreed to the proposition without the slightest hesitation.  But
the nearer the time of departure came, the bitterer was the
sacrifice he was making to what he thought his duty.

His wound had healed, and he was driving about making
preparations for his departure for Tashkend.

"To see her once and then to bury myself, to die," he thought,
and as he was paying farewell visits, he uttered this thought to
Betsy.  Charged with this commission, Betsy had gone to Anna, and
brought him back a negative reply.

"So much the better," thought Vronsky, when he received the news.
"It was a weakness, which would have shattered what strength I
have left."

Next day Betsy herself came to him in the morning, and announced
that she had heard through Oblonsky as a positive fact that
Alexey Alexandrovitch had agreed to a divorce, and that therefore
Vronsky could see Anna.

Without even troubling himself to see Betsy out of his flat,
forgetting all his resolutions, without asking when he could see
her, where her husband was, Vronsky drove straight to the
Karenins'.  He ran up the stairs seeing no one and nothing, and
with a rapid step, almost breaking into a run, he went into her
room.  And without considering, without noticing whether there
was anyone in the room or not, he flung his arms round her, and
began to cover her face, her hands, her neck with kisses.

Anna had been preparing herself for this meeting, had thought
what she would say to him, but she did not succeed in saying
anything of it; his passion mastered her.  She tried to calm him,
to calm herself, but it was too late.  His feeling infected her.
Her lips trembled so that for a long while she could say nothing.

"Yes, you have conquered me, and I am yours," she said at last,
pressing his hands to her bosom.

"So it had to be," he said.  "So long as we live, it must be so.
I know it now."

"That's true," she said, getting whiter and whiter, and embracing
his head.  "Still there is something terrible in it after all
that has happened."

"It will all pass, it will all pass; we shall be so happy.  Our
love, if it could be stronger, will be strengthened by there
being something terrible in it," he said, lifting his head and
parting his strong teeth in a smile.

And she could not but respond with a smile--not to his words, but
to the love in his eyes.  She took his hand and stroked her
chilled cheeks and cropped head with it.

"I don't know you with this short hair.  You've grown so pretty.
A boy.  But how pale you are!"

"Yes, I'm very weak," she said, smiling.  And her lips began
trembling again.

"We'll go to Italy; you will get strong," he said.

"Can it be possible we could be like husband and wife, alone,
your family with you?" she said, looking close into his eyes.

"It only seems strange to me that it can ever have been
otherwise."

"Stiva says that _he_ has agreed to everything, but I can't accept
_his_ generosity," she said, looking dreamily past Vronsky's face.
"I don't want a divorce; it's all the same to me now.  Only I
don't know what he will decide about Seryozha."

He could not conceive how at this moment of their meeting she
could remember and think of her son, of divorce.  What did it all
matter?

"Don't speak of that, don't think of it," he said, turning her
hand in his, and trying to draw her attention to him; but still
she did not look at him.

"Oh, why didn't I die! it would have been better," she said, and
silent tears flowed down both her cheeks; but she tried to smile,
so as not to wound him.

To decline the flattering and dangerous appointment at Tashkend
would have been, Vronsky had till then considered, disgraceful
and impossible.  But now, without an instant's consideration, he
declined it, and observing dissatisfaction in the most exalted
quarters at this step, he immediately retired from the army.

A month later Alexey Alexandrovitch was left alone with his son
in his house at Petersburg, while Anna and Vronsky had gone
abroad, not having obtained a divorce, but having absolutely
declined all idea of one.




PART 5



Chapter 1


Princess Shtcherbatskaya considered that it was out of the
question for the wedding to take place before Lent, just five
weeks off, since not half the trousseau could possibly be ready
by that time.  But she could not but agree with Levin that to fix
it for after Lent would be putting it off too late, as an old
aunt of Prince Shtcherbatsky's was seriously ill and might die,
and then the mourning would delay the wedding still longer.  And
therefore, deciding to divide the trousseau into two parts--a
larger and smaller trousseau--the princess consented to have the
wedding before Lent.  She determined that she would get the
smaller part of the trousseau all ready now, and the larger part
should be made later, and she was much vexed with Levin because
he was incapable of giving her a serious answer to the question
whether he agreed to this arrangement or not.  The arrangement
was the more suitable as, immediately after the wedding, the
young people were to go to the country, where the more important
part of the trousseau would not be wanted.

Levin still continued in the same delirious condition in which it
seemed to him that he and his happiness constituted the chief and
sole aim of all existence, and that he need not now think or care
about anything, that everything was being done and would be done
for him by others.  He had not even plans and aims for the
future, he left its arrangement to others, knowing that
everything would be delightful.  His brother Sergey Ivanovitch,
Stepan Arkadyevitch, and the princess guided him in doing what he
had to do.  All he did was to agree entirely with everything
suggested to him.  His brother raised money for him, the princess
advised him to leave Moscow after the wedding.  Stepan
Arkadyevitch advised him to go abroad.  He agreed to everything.
"Do what you choose, if it amuses you.  I'm happy, and my
happiness can be no greater and no less for anything you do," he
thought.  When he told Kitty of Stepan Arkadyevitch's advice that
they should go abroad, he was much surprised that she did not
agree to this, and had some definite requirements of her own in
regard to their future.  She knew Levin had work he loved in the
country.  She did not, as he saw, understand this work, she did
not even care to understand it.  But that did not prevent her
from regarding it as a matter of great importance.  And then she
knew their home would be in the country, and she wanted to go,
not abroad where she was not going to live, but to the place
where their home would be.  This definitely expressed purpose
astonished Levin.  But since he did not care either way, he
immediately asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, as though it were his
duty, to go down to the country and to arrange everything there
to the best of his ability with the taste of which he had so
much.

"But I say," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him one day after he had
come back from the country, where he had got everything ready for
the young people's arrival, "have you a certificate of having
been at confession?"

"No.  But what of it?"

"You can't be married without it."

"_Aïe, aïe, aïe!_" cried Levin.  "Why, I believe it's nine years
since I've taken the sacrament!  I never thought of it."

"You're a pretty fellow!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch laughing, "and
you call me a Nihilist!  But this won't do, you know.  You must
take the sacrament."

"When?  There are four days left now."

Stepan Arkadyevitch arranged this also, and Levin had to go to
confession.  To Levin, as to any unbeliever who respects the
beliefs of others, it was exceedingly disagreeable to be present
at and take part in church ceremonies.  At this moment, in his
present softened state of feeling, sensitive to everything, this
inevitable act of hypocrisy was not merely painful to Levin, it
seemed to him utterly impossible.  Now, in the heyday of his
highest glory, his fullest flower, he would have to be a liar or
a scoffer.  He felt incapable of being either.  But though he
repeatedly plied Stepan Arkadyevitch with questions as to the
possibility of obtaining a certificate without actually
communicating, Stepan Arkadyevitch maintained that it was out of
the question.

"Besides, what is it to you--two days?  And he's an awfully nice
clever old fellow.  He'll pull the tooth out for you so gently,
you won't notice it."

Standing at the first litany, Levin attempted to revive in
himself his youthful recollections of the intense religious
emotion he had passed through between the ages of sixteen and
seventeen.

But he was at once convinced that it was utterly impossible to
him.  He attempted to look at it all as an empty custom, having
no sort of meaning, like the custom of paying calls.  But he felt
that he could not do that either.  Levin found himself, like the
majority of his contemporaries, in the vaguest position in regard
to religion.  Believe he could not, and at the same time he had
no firm conviction that it was all wrong.  And consequently, not
being able to believe in the significance of what he was doing
nor to regard it with indifference as an empty formality, during
the whole period of preparing for the sacrament he was conscious
of a feeling of discomfort and shame at doing what he did not
himself understand, and what, as an inner voice told him, was
therefore false and wrong.

During the service he would first listen to the prayers, trying
to attach some meaning to them not discordant with his own views;
then feeling that he could not understand and must condemn them,
he tried not to listen to them, but to attend to the thoughts,
observations, and memories which floated through his brain with
extreme vividness during this idle time of standing in church.

He had stood through the litany, the evening service and the
midnight service, and the next day he got up earlier than usual,
and without having tea went at eight o'clock in the morning to
the church for the morning service and the confession.

There was no one in the church but a beggar soldier, two old
women, and the church officials.  A young deacon, whose long back
showed in two distinct halves through his thin undercassock, met
him, and at once going to a little table at the wall read the
exhortation.  During the reading, especially at the frequent and
rapid repetition of the same words, "Lord, have mercy on us!"
which resounded with an echo, Levin felt that thought was shut
and sealed up, and that it must not be touched or stirred now or
confusion would be the result; and so standing behind the deacon
he went on thinking of his own affairs, neither listening nor
examining what was said.  "It's wonderful what expression there
is in her hand," he thought, remembering how they had been
sitting the day before at a corner table.  They had nothing to
talk about, as was almost always the case at this time, and
laying her hand on the table she kept opening and shutting it,
and laughed herself as she watched her action.  He remembered how
he had kissed it and then had examined the lines on the pink
palm.  "Have mercy on us again!" thought Levin, crossing himself,
bowing, and looking at the supple spring of the deacon's back
bowing before him.  "She took my hand then and examined the lines
'You've got a splendid hand,' she said." And he looked at his own
hand and the short hand of the deacon.  "Yes, now it will soon be
over," he thought.  "No, it seems to be beginning again," he
thought, listening to the prayers.  "No, it's just ending: there
he is bowing down to the ground.  That's always at the end."

The deacon's hand in a plush cuff accepted a three-rouble note
unobtrusively, and the deacon said he would put it down in the
register, and his new boots creaking jauntily over the flagstones
of the empty church, he went to the altar.  A moment later he
peeped out thence and beckoned to Levin.  Thought, till then
locked up, began to stir in Levin's head, but he made haste to
drive it away.  "It will come right somehow," he thought, and
went towards the altar-rails.  He went up the steps, and turning
to the right saw the priest.  The priest, a little old man with a
scanty grizzled beard and weary, good-natured eyes, was standing
at the altar-rails, turning over the pages of a missal.  With a
slight bow to Levin he began immediately reading prayers in the
official voice.  When he had finished them he bowed down to the
ground and turned, facing Levin.

"Christ is present here unseen, receiving your confession," he
said, pointing to the crucifix.  "Do you believe in all the
doctrines of the Holy Apostolic Church?" the priest went on,
turning his eyes away from Levin's face and folding his hands
under his stole.

"I have doubted, I doubt everything," said Levin in a voice that
jarred on himself, and he ceased speaking.

The priest waited a few seconds to see if he would not say more,
and closing his eyes he said quickly, with a broad, Vladimirsky
accent:

"Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind, but we must pray
that God in His mercy will strengthen us.  What are your special
sins?" he added, without the slightest interval, as though
anxious not to waste time.

"My chief sin is doubt.  I have doubts of everything, and for the
most part I am in doubt."

"Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind," the priest
repeated the same words.  "What do you doubt about principally?"

"I doubt of everything.  I sometimes even have doubts of the
existence of God," Levin could not help saying, and he was
horrified at the impropriety of what he was saying.  But Levin's
words did not, it seemed, make much impression on the priest.

"What sort of doubt can there be of the existence of God?" he
said hurriedly, with a just perceptible smile.

Levin did not speak.

"What doubt can you have of the Creator when you behold His
creation?" the priest went on in the rapid customary jargon.
"Who has decked the heavenly firmament with its lights?  Who has
clothed the earth in its beauty?  How explain it without the
Creator?" he said, looking inquiringly at Levin.

Levin felt that it would be improper to enter upon a metaphysical
discussion with the priest, and so he said in reply merely what
was a direct answer to the question.

"I don't know," he said.

"You don't know!  Then how can you doubt that God created all?"
the priest said, with good-humored perplexity.

"I don't understand it at all," said Levin, blushing, and feeling
that his words were stupid, and that they could not be anything
but stupid in such a position.

"Pray to God and beseech Him.  Even the holy fathers had doubts,
and prayed to God to strengthen their faith.  The devil has great
power, and we must resist him.  Pray to God, beseech Him.  Pray
to God," he repeated hurriedly.

The priest paused for some time, as though meditating.

"You're about, I hear, to marry the daughter of my parishioner
and son in the spirit, Prince Shtcherbatsky?" he resumed, with a
smile.  "An excellent young lady."

"Yes," answered Levin, blushing for the priest.  "What does he
want to ask me about this at confession for?" he thought.

And, as though answering his thought, the priest said to him:

"You are about to enter into holy matrimony, and God may bless
you with offspring.  Well, what sort of bringing-up can you give
your babes if you do not overcome the temptation of the devil,
enticing you to infidelity?" he said, with gentle
reproachfulness.  "If you love your child as a good father, you
will not desire only wealth, luxury, honor for your infant; you
will be anxious for his salvation, his spiritual enlightenment
with the light of truth.  Eh?  What answer will you make him when
the innocent babe asks you: 'Papa! who made all that enchants me
in this world--the earth, the waters, the sun, the flowers, the
grass?'  Can you say to him: 'I don't know'? You cannot but know,
since the Lord God in His infinite mercy has revealed it to us.
Or your child will ask you: 'What awaits me in the life beyond
the tomb?'  What will you say to him when you know nothing?  How
will you answer him?  Will you leave him to the allurements of
the world and the devil?  That's not right," he said, and he
stopped, putting his head on one side and looking at Levin with
his kindly, gentle eyes.

Levin made no answer this time, not because he did not want to
enter upon a discussion with the priest, but because, so far, no
one had ever asked him such questions, and when his babes did ask
him those questions, it would be time enough to think about
answering them.

"You are entering upon a time of life," pursued the priest, "when
you must choose your path and keep to it.  Pray to God that He
may in His mercy aid you and have mercy on you!" he concluded.
"Our Lord and God, Jesus Christ, in the abundance and riches of
His lovingkindness, forgives this child..." and, finishing the
prayer of absolution, the priest blessed him and dismissed him.

On getting home that day, Levin had a delightful sense of relief
at the awkward position being over and having been got through
without his having to tell a lie.  Apart from this, there
remained a vague memory that what the kind, nice old fellow had
said had not been at all so stupid as he had fancied at first,
and that there was something in it that must be cleared up.

"Of course, not now," thought Levin, "but some day later on."
Levin felt more than ever now that there was something not clear
and not clean in his soul, and that, in regard to religion, he
was in the same position which he perceived so clearly and
disliked in others, and for which he blamed his friend Sviazhsky.

Levin spent that evening with his betrothed at Dolly's, and was
in very high spirits.  To explain to Stepan Arkadyevitch the
state of excitement in which he found himself, he said that he
was happy like a dog being trained to jump through a hoop, who,
having at last caught the idea, and done what was required of
him, whines and wags its tail, and jumps up to the table and the
windows in its delight.



Chapter 2


On the day of the wedding, according to the Russian custom (the
princess and Darya Alexandrovna insisted on strictly keeping all
the customs), Levin did not see his betrothed, and dined at his
hotel with three bachelor friends, casually brought together at
his rooms.  These were Sergey Ivanovitch, Katavasov, a university
friend, now professor of natural science, whom Levin had met in
the street and insisted on taking home with him, and Tchirikov,
his best man, a Moscow conciliation-board judge, Levin's
companion in his bear-hunts.  The dinner was a very merry one:
Sergey Ivanovitch was in his happiest mood, and was much amused
by Katavasov's originality.  Katavasov, feeling his originality
was appreciated and understood, made the most of it.  Tchirikov
always gave a lively and good-humored support to conversation of
any sort.

"See, now," said Katavasov, drawling his words from a habit
acquired in the lecture-room, "what a capable fellow was our
friend Konstantin Dmitrievitch.  I'm not speaking of present
company, for he's absent.  At the time he left the university he
was fond of science, took an interest in humanity; now one-half
of his abilities is devoted to deceiving himself, and the other
to justifying the deceit."

"A more determined enemy of matrimony than you I never saw," said
Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Oh, no, I'm not an enemy of matrimony.  I'm in favor of division
of labor.  People who can do nothing else ought to rear people
while the rest work for their happiness and enlightenment.
That's how I look at it.  To muddle up two trades is the error of
the amateur; I'm not one of their number."

"How happy I shall be when I hear that you're in love!" said
Levin.  "Please invite me to the wedding."

"I'm in love now."

"Yes, with a cuttlefish!  You know," Levin turned to his brother,
"Mihail Semyonovitch is writing a work on the digestive organs of
the..."

"Now, make a muddle of it!  It doesn't matter what about.  And
the fact is, I certainly do love cuttlefish."

"But that's no hindrance to your loving your wife."

"The cuttlefish is no hindrance.  The wife is the hindrance."

"Why so?"

"Oh, you'll see!  You care about farming, hunting,--well, you'd
better look out!"

"Arhip was here today; he said there were a lot of elks in
Prudno, and two bears," said Tchirikov.

"Well, you must go and get them without me."

"Ah, that's the truth," said Sergey Ivanovitch.  "And you may say
good-bye to bear-hunting for the future--your wife won't allow
it!"

Levin smiled.  The picture of his wife not letting him go was so
pleasant that he was ready to renounce the delights of looking
upon bears forever.

"Still, it's a pity they should get those two bears without you.
Do you remember last time at Hapilovo? That was a delightful
hunt!" said Tchirikov.

Levin had not the heart to disillusion him of the notion that
there could be something delightful apart from her, and so said
nothing.

"There's some sense in this custom of saying good-bye to bachelor
life," said Sergey Ivanovitch.  "However happy you may be, you
must regret your freedom."

"And confess there is a feeling that you want to jump out of the
window, like Gogol's bridegroom?"

"Of course there is, but it isn't confessed," said Katavasov, and
he broke into loud laughter.

"Oh, well, the window's open.  Let's start off this instant to
Tver!  There's a big she-bear; one can go right up to the lair.
Seriously, let's go by the five o'clock!  And here let them do
what they like," said Tchirikov, smiling.

"Well, now, on my honor," said Levin, smiling, "I can't find in
my heart that feeling of regret for my freedom."

"Yes, there's such a chaos in your heart just now that you can't
find anything there," said Katavasov.  "Wait a bit, when you set
it to rights a little, you'll find it!"

"No; if so, I should have felt a little, apart from my feeling"
(he could not say love before them) "and happiness, a certain
regret at losing my freedom....  On the contrary, I am glad at
the very loss of my freedom."

"Awful! It's a hopeless case!" said Katavasov.  "Well, let's
drink to his recovery, or wish that a hundredth part of his
dreams may be realized--and that would be happiness such as never
has been seen on earth!"

Soon after dinner the guests went away to be in time to be
dressed for the wedding.

When he was left alone, and recalled the conversation of these
bachelor friends, Levin asked himself: had he in his heart that
regret for his freedom of which they had spoken?  He smiled at
the question.  "Freedom!  What is freedom for?  Happiness is only
in loving and wishing her wishes, thinking her thoughts, that is
to say, not freedom at all--that's happiness!"

"But do I know her ideas, her wishes, her feelings?" some voice
suddenly whispered to him.  The smile died away from his face,
and he grew thoughtful.  And suddenly a strange feeling came upon
him.  There came over him a dread and doubt--doubt of everything.

"What if she does not love me?  What if she's marrying me simply
to be married?  What if she doesn't see herself what she's
doing?" he asked himself.  "She may come to her senses, and only
when she is being married realize that she does not and cannot
love me."  And strange, most evil thoughts of her began to come
to him.  He was jealous of Vronsky, as he had been a year ago, as
though the evening he had seen her with Vronsky had been
yesterday.  He suspected she had not told him everything.

He jumped up quickly.  "No, this can't go on!" he said to himself
in despair.  "I'll go to her; I'll ask her; I'll say for the last
time: we are free, and hadn't we better stay so?  Anything's
better than endless misery, disgrace, unfaithfulness!" With
despair in his heart and bitter anger against all men, against
himself, against her, he went out of the hotel and drove to her
house.

He found her in one of the back rooms.  She was sitting on a
chest and making some arrangements with her maid, sorting over
heaps of dresses of different colors, spread on the backs of
chairs and on the floor.

"Ah!" she cried, seeing him, and beaming with delight.  "Kostya!
Konstantin Dmitrievitch!" (These latter days she used these names
almost alternately.) "I didn't expect you! I'm going through my
wardrobe to see what's for whom..."

"Oh! that's very nice!" he said gloomily, looking at the maid.

"You can go, Dunyasha, I'll call you presently," said Kitty.
"Kostya, what's the matter?" she asked, definitely adopting this
familiar name as soon as the maid had gone out.  She noticed his
strange face, agitated and gloomy, and a panic came over her.

"Kitty! I'm in torture.  I can't suffer alone," he said with
despair in his voice, standing before her and looking imploringly
into her eyes.  He saw already from her loving, truthful face,
that nothing could come of what he had meant to say, but yet he
wanted her to reassure him herself.  "I've come to say that
there's still time.  This can all be stopped and set right."

"What?  I don't understand.  What is the matter?"

"What I have said a thousand times over, and can't help thinking
...that I'm not worthy of you.  You couldn't consent to marry
me.  Think a little.  You've made a mistake.  Think it over
thoroughly.  You can't love me....  If...better say so," he said,
not looking at her.  "I shall be wretched.  Let people say what
they like; anything's better than misery....  Far better now
while there's still time...."

"I don't understand," she answered, panic-stricken; "you mean you
want to give it up...don't want it?"

"Yes, if you don't love me."

"You're out of your mind!" she cried, turning crimson with
vexation.  But his face was so piteous, that she restrained her
vexation, and flinging some clothes off an arm-chair, she sat
down beside him.  "What are you thinking? tell me all."

"I am thinking you can't love me.  What can you love me for?"

"My God! what can I do?..." she said, and burst into tears.

"Oh! what have I done?" he cried, and kneeling before her, he
fell to kissing her hands.

When the princess came into the room five minutes later, she
found them completely reconciled.  Kitty had not simply assured
him that she loved him, but had gone so far--in answer to his
question, what she loved him for--as to explain what for.  She
told him that she loved him because she understood him
completely, because she knew what he would like, and because
everything he liked was good.  And this seemed to him perfectly
clear.  When the princess came to them, they were sitting side by
side on the chest, sorting the dresses and disputing over Kitty's
wanting to give Dunyasha the brown dress she had been wearing
when Levin proposed to her, while he insisted that that dress
must never be given away, but Dunyasha must have the blue one.

"How is it you don't see?  She's a brunette, and it won't suit
her....  I've worked it all out."

Hearing why he had come, the princess was half humorously, half
seriously angry with him, and sent him home to dress and not to
hinder Kitty's hair-dressing, as Charles the hair-dresser was
just coming.

"As it is, she's been eating nothing lately and is losing her
looks, and then you must come and upset her with your nonsense,"
she said to him.  "Get along with you, my dear!"

Levin, guilty and shamefaced, but pacified, went back to his
hotel.  His brother, Darya Alexandrovna, and Stepan Arkadyevitch,
all in full dress, were waiting for him to bless him with the
holy picture.  There was no time to lose.  Darya Alexandrovna had
to drive home again to fetch her curled and pomaded son, who was
to carry the holy pictures after the bride.  Then a carriage had
to be sent for the best man, and another that would take Sergey
Ivanovitch away would have to be sent back....  Altogether
there were a great many most complicated matters to be considered
and arranged.  One thing was unmistakable, that there must be no
delay, as it was already half-past six.

Nothing special happened at the ceremony of benediction with the
holy picture.  Stepan Arkadyevitch stood in a comically solemn
pose beside his wife, took the holy picture, and telling Levin
to bow down to the ground, he blessed him with his kindly,
ironical smile, and kissed him three times; Darya Alexandrovna
did the same, and immediately was in a hurry to get off, and
again plunged into the intricate question of the destinations of
the various carriages.

"Come, I'll tell you how we'll manage: you drive in our carriage
to fetch him, and Sergey Ivanovitch, if he'll be so good, will
drive there and then send his carriage."

"Of course; I shall be delighted."

"We'll come on directly with him.  Are your things sent off?"
said Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Yes," answered Levin, and he told Kouzma to put out his clothes
for him to dress.



Chapter 3


A crowd of people, principally women, was thronging round the
church lighted up for the wedding.  Those who had not succeeded
in getting into the main entrance were crowding about the
windows, pushing, wrangling, and peeping through the gratings.

More than twenty carriages had already been drawn up in ranks
along the street by the police.  A police officer, regardless of
the frost, stood at the entrance, gorgeous in his uniform.  More
carriages were continually driving up, and ladies wearing flowers
and carrying their trains, and men taking off their helmets or
black hats kept walking into the church.  Inside the church both
lusters were already lighted, and all the candles before the holy
pictures.  The gilt on the red ground of the holy picture-stand,
and the gilt relief on the pictures, and the silver of the
lusters and candlesticks, and the stones of the floor, and the
rugs, and the banners above in the choir, and the steps of the
altar, and the old blackened books, and the cassocks and
surplices--all were flooded with light.  On the right side of the
warm church, in the crowd of frock coats and white ties, uniforms
and broadcloth, velvet, satin, hair and flowers, bare shoulders
and arms and long gloves, there was discreet but lively
conversation that echoed strangely in the high cupola.  Every
time there was heard the creak of the opened door the
conversation in the crowd died away, and everybody looked round
expecting to see the bride and bridegroom come in.  But the door
had opened more than ten times, and each time it was either a
belated guest or guests, who joined the circle of the invited on
the right, or a spectator, who had eluded or softened the police
officer, and went to join the crowd of outsiders on the left.
Both the guests and the outside public had by now passed through
all the phases of anticipation.

At first they imagined that the bride and bridegroom would arrive
immediately, and attached no importance at all to their being
late.  Then they began to look more and more often towards the
door, and to talk of whether anything could have happened.  Then
the long delay began to be positively discomforting, and
relations and guests tried to look as if they were not thinking
of the bridegroom but were engrossed in conversation.

The head deacon, as though to remind them of the value of his
time, coughed impatiently, making the window-panes quiver in
their frames.  In the choir the bored choristers could be heard
trying their voices and blowing their noses.  The priest was
continually sending first the beadle and then the deacon to find
out whether the bridegroom had not come, more and more often he
went himself, in a lilac vestment and an embroidered sash, to the
side door, expecting to see the bridegroom.  At last one of the
ladies, glancing at her watch, said, "It really is strange,
though!" and all the guests became uneasy and began loudly
expressing their wonder and dissatisfaction.  One of the
bridegroom's best men went to find out what had happened.  Kitty
meanwhile had long ago been quite ready, and in her white dress
and long veil and wreath of orange blossoms she was standing in
the drawing-room of the Shtcherbatskys' house with her sister,
Madame Lvova, who was her bridal-mother.  She was looking out of
the window, and had been for over half an hour anxiously
expecting to hear from the best man that her bridegroom was at
the church.

Levin meanwhile, in his trousers, but without his coat and
waistcoat, was walking to and fro in his room at the hotel,
continually putting his head out of the door and looking up and
down the corridor.  But in the corridor there was no sign of the
person he was looking for and he came back in despair, and
frantically waving his hands addressed Stepan Arkadyevitch, who
was smoking serenely.

"Was ever a man in such a fearful fool's position?" he said.

"Yes, it is stupid," Stepan Arkadyevitch assented, smiling
soothingly.  "But don't worry, it'll be brought directly."

"No, what is to be done!" said Levin, with smothered fury.  "And
these fools of open waistcoats!  Out of the question!" he said,
looking at the crumpled front of his shirt.  "And what if the
things have been taken on to the railway station!" he roared in
desperation.

"Then you must put on mine."

"I ought to have done so long ago, if at all."

"It's not nice to look ridiculous....  Wait a bit! it will
_come round_."

The point was that when Levin asked for his evening suit, Kouzma,
his old servant, had brought him the coat, waistcoat, and
everything that was wanted.

"But the shirt!" cried Levin.

"You've got a shirt on," Kouzma answered, with a placid smile.

Kouzma had not thought of leaving out a clean shirt, and on
receiving instructions to pack up everything and send it round to
the Shtcherbatskys' house, from which the young people were to
set out the same evening, he had done so, packing everything but
the dress suit.  The shirt worn since the morning was crumpled
and out of the question with the fashionable open waistcoat.  It
was a long way to send to the Shtcherbatskys'.  They sent out to
buy a shirt.  The servant came back; everything was shut up--it
was Sunday.  They sent to Stepan Arkadyevitch's and brought a
shirt--it was impossibly wide and short.  They sent finally to
the Shtcherbatskys' to unpack the things.  The bridegroom was
expected at the church while he was pacing up and down his room
like a wild beast in a cage, peeping out into the corridor, and
with horror and despair recalling what absurd things he had said
to Kitty and what she might be thinking now.

At last the guilty Kouzma flew panting into the room with the
shirt.

"Only just in time.  They were just lifting it into the van,"
said Kouzma.

Three minutes later Levin ran full speed into the corridor, not
looking at his watch for fear of aggravating his sufferings.

"You won't help matters like this," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with
a smile, hurrying with more deliberation after him.  "It will
come round, it will come round...I tell you."



Chapter 4


"They've come!"  "Here he is!"  "Which one?"  "Rather young, eh?"
"Why, my dear soul, she looks more dead than alive!" were the
comments in the crowd, when Levin, meeting his bride in the
entrance, walked with her into the church.

Stepan Arkadyevitch told his wife the cause of the delay, and the
guests were whispering it with smiles to one another.  Levin saw
nothing and no one; he did not take his eyes off his bride.

Everyone said she had lost her looks dreadfully of late, and was
not nearly so pretty on her wedding day as usual; but Levin did
not think so.  He looked at her hair done up high, with the long
white veil and white flowers and the high, stand-up, scalloped
collar, that in such a maidenly fashion hid her long neck at the
sides and only showed it in front, her strikingly slender figure,
and it seemed to him that she looked better than ever--not
because these flowers, this veil, this gown from Paris added
anything to her beauty; but because, in spite of the elaborate
sumptuousness of her attire, the expression of her sweet face, of
her eyes, of her lips was still her own characteristic expression
of guileless truthfulness.

"I was beginning to think you meant to run away," she said, and
smiled to him.

"It's so stupid, what happened to me, I'm ashamed to speak of
it!" he said, reddening, and he was obliged to turn to Sergey
Ivanovitch, who came up to him.

"This is a pretty story of yours about the shirt!" said Sergey
Ivanovitch, shaking his head and smiling.

"Yes, yes!" answered Levin, without an idea of what they were
talking about.

"Now, Kostya, you have to decide," said Stepan Arkadyevitch with
an air of mock dismay, "a weighty question.  You are at this
moment just in the humor to appreciate all its gravity.  They ask
me, are they to light the candles that have been lighted before
or candles that have never been lighted? It's a matter of ten
roubles," he added, relaxing his lips into a smile.  "I have
decided, but I was afraid you might not agree."

Levin saw it was a joke, but he could not smile.

"Well, how's it to be then?--unlighted or lighted candles? that's
the question."

"Yes, yes, unlighted."

"Oh, I'm very glad.  The question's decided!" said Stepan
Arkadyevitch, smiling.  "How silly men are, though, in this
position," he said to Tchirikov, when Levin, after looking
absently at him, had moved back to his bride.

"Kitty, mind you're the first to step on the carpet," said
Countess Nordston, coming up.  "You're a nice person!" she said
to Levin.

"Aren't you frightened, eh?" said Marya Dmitrievna, an old aunt.

"Are you cold?  You're pale.  Stop a minute, stoop down," said
Kitty's sister, Madame Lvova, and with her plump, handsome arms
she smilingly set straight the flowers on her head.

Dolly came up, tried to say something, but could not speak,
cried, and then laughed unnaturally.

Kitty looked at all of them with the same absent eyes as Levin.

Meanwhile the officiating clergy had got into their vestments,
and the priest and deacon came out to the lectern, which stood in
the forepart of the church.  The priest turned to Levin saying
something.  Levin did not hear what the priest said.

"Take the bride's hand and lead her up," the best man said to
Levin.

It was a long while before Levin could make out what was expected
of him.  For a long time they tried to set him right and made him
begin again--because he kept taking Kitty by the wrong arm or
with the wrong arm--till he understood at last that what he had
to do was, without changing his position, to take her right hand
in his right hand.  When at last he had taken the bride's hand in
the correct way, the priest walked a few paces in front of them
and stopped at the lectern.  The crowd of friends and relations
moved after them, with a buzz of talk and a rustle of skirts.
Someone stooped down and pulled out the bride's train.  The
church became so still that the drops of wax could be heard
falling from the candles.

The little old priest in his ecclesiastical cap, with his long
silvery-gray locks of hair parted behind his ears, was fumbling
with something at the lectern, putting out his little old hands
from under the heavy silver vestment with the gold cross on the
back of it.

Stepan Arkadyevitch approached him cautiously, whispered
something, and making a sign to Levin, walked back again.

The priest lighted two candles, wreathed with flowers, and
holding them sideways so that the wax dropped slowly from them he
turned, facing the bridal pair.  The priest was the same old man
that had confessed Levin.  He looked with weary and melancholy
eyes at the bride and bridegroom, sighed, and putting his right
hand out from his vestment, blessed the bridegroom with it, and
also with a shade of solicitous tenderness laid the crossed
fingers on the bowed head of Kitty.  Then he gave them the
candles, and taking the censer, moved slowly away from them.

"Can it be true?" thought Levin, and he looked round at his
bride.  Looking down at her he saw her face in profile, and from
the scarcely perceptible quiver of her lips and eyelashes he knew
she was aware of his eyes upon her.  She did not look round, but
the high scalloped collar, that reached her little pink ear,
trembled faintly.  He saw that a sigh was held back in her
throat, and the little hand in the long glove shook as it held
the candle.

All the fuss of the shirt, of being late, all the talk of friends
and relations, their annoyance, his ludicrous position--all
suddenly passed away and he was filled with joy and dread.

The handsome, stately head-deacon wearing a silver robe and his
curly locks standing out at each side of his head, stepped
smartly forward, and lifting his stole on two fingers, stood
opposite the priest.

"Blessed be the name of the Lord," the solemn syllables rang out
slowly one after another, setting the air quivering with waves of
sound.

"Blessed is the name of our God, from the beginning, is now, and
ever shall be," the little old priest answered in a submissive,
piping voice, still fingering something at the lectern.  And the
full chorus of the unseen choir rose up, filling the whole
church, from the windows to the vaulted roof, with broad waves of
melody.  It grew stronger, rested for an instant, and slowly died
away.

They prayed, as they always do, for peace from on high and for
salvation, for the Holy Synod, and for the Tsar; they prayed,
too, for the servants of God, Konstantin and Ekaterina, now
plighting their troth.

"Vouchsafe to them love made perfect, peace and help, O Lord, we
beseech Thee," the whole church seemed to breathe with the voice
of the head deacon.

Levin heard the words, and they impressed him.  "How did they
guess that it is help, just help that one wants?" he thought,
recalling all his fears and doubts of late.  "What do I know?
what can I do in this fearful business," he thought, "without
help?  Yes, it is help I want now."

When the deacon had finished the prayer for the Imperial family,
the priest turned to the bridal pair with a book: "Eternal God,
that joinest together in love them that were separate," he read
in a gentle, piping voice: "who hast ordained the union of holy
wedlock that cannot be set asunder, Thou who didst bless Isaac
and Rebecca and their descendants, according to Thy Holy
Covenant; bless Thy servants, Konstantin and Ekaterina, leading
them in the path of all good works.  For gracious and merciful
art Thou, our Lord, and glory be to Thee, the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, now and ever shall be."

"Amen!" the unseen choir sent rolling again upon the air.

"'Joinest together in love them that were separate.' What deep
meaning in those words, and how they correspond with what one
feels at this moment," thought Levin.  "Is she feeling the same
as I?"

And looking round, he met her eyes, and from their expression he
concluded that she was understanding it just as he was.  But this
was a mistake; she almost completely missed the meaning of the
words of the service; she had not heard them, in fact.  She could
not listen to them and take them in, so strong was the one
feeling that filled her breast and grew stronger and stronger.
That feeling was joy at the completion of the process that for
the last month and a half had been going on in her soul, and had
during those six weeks been a joy and a torture to her.  On the
day when in the drawing room of the house in Arbaty Street she
had gone up to him in her brown dress, and given herself to him
without a word--on that day, at that hour, there took place in
her heart a complete severance from all her old life, and a quite
different, new, utterly strange life had begun for her, while the
old life was actually going on as before.  Those six weeks had
for her been a time of the utmost bliss and the utmost misery.
All her life, all her desires and hopes were concentrated on this
one man, still uncomprehended by her, to whom she was bound by a
feeling of alternate attraction and repulsion, even less
comprehended than the man himself, and all the while she was
going on living in the outward conditions of her old life.
Living the old life, she was horrified at herself, at her utter
insurmountable callousness to all her own past, to things, to
habits, to the people she had loved, who loved her--to her
mother, who was wounded by her indifference, to her kind, tender
father, till then dearer than all the world.  At one moment she
was horrified at this indifference, at another she rejoiced at
what had brought her to this indifference.  She could not frame a
thought, not a wish apart from life with this man; but this new
life was not yet, and she could not even picture it clearly to
herself.  There was only anticipation, the dread and joy of the
new and the unknown.  And now behold--anticipation and
uncertainty and remorse at the abandonment of the old life--all
was ending, and the new was beginning.  This new life could not
but have terrors for her inexperience; but, terrible or not, the
change had been wrought six weeks before in her soul, and this
was merely the final sanction of what had long been completed in
her heart.

Turning again to the lectern, the priest with some difficulty
took Kitty's little ring, and asking Levin for his hand, put it
on the first joint of his finger.  "The servant of God,
Konstantin, plights his troth to the servant of God, Ekaterina."
And putting his big ring on Kitty's touchingly weak, pink little
finger, the priest said the same thing.

And the bridal pair tried several times to understand what they
had to do, and each time made some mistake and were corrected by
the priest in a whisper.  At last, having duly performed the
ceremony, having signed the rings with the cross, the priest
handed Kitty the big ring, and Levin the little one.  Again they
were puzzled, and passed the rings from hand to hand, still
without doing what was expected.

Dolly, Tchirikov, and Stepan Arkadyevitch stepped forward to set
them right.  There was an interval of hesitation, whispering, and
smiles; but the expression of solemn emotion on the faces of the
betrothed pair did not change: on the contrary, in their
perplexity over their hands they looked more grave and deeply
moved than before, and the smile with which Stepan Arkadyevitch
whispered to them that now they would each put on their own ring
died away on his lips.  He had a feeling that any smile would jar
on them.

"Thou who didst from the beginning create male and female," the
priest read after the exchange of rings, "from Thee woman was
given to man to be a helpmeet to him, and for the procreation of
children.  O Lord, our God, who hast poured down the blessings of
Thy Truth according to Thy Holy Covenant upon Thy chosen
servants, our fathers, from generation to generation, bless Thy
servants Konstantin and Ekaterina, and make their troth fast in
faith, and union of hearts, and truth, and love...."

Levin felt more and more that all his ideas of marriage, all his
dreams of how he would order his life, were mere childishness,
and that it was something he had not understood hitherto, and now
understood less than ever, though it was being performed upon
him.  The lump in his throat rose higher and higher, tears that
would not be checked came into his eyes.



Chapter 5


In the church there was all  Moscow, all the friends and
relations; and  during the ceremony of plighting troth, in the
brilliantly lighted church, there was an incessant flow of
discreetly subdued talk in the circle of gaily dressed women and
girls, and men in white ties, frockcoats, and uniforms.  The talk
was principally kept up by the men, while the women were absorbed
in watching every detail of the ceremony, which always means so
much to them.

In the little group nearest to the bride were her two sisters:
Dolly, and the other one, the self-possessed beauty, Madame
Lvova, who had just arrived from abroad.

"Why is it Marie's in lilac, as bad as black, at a wedding?" said
Madame Korsunskaya.

"With her complexion, it's the one salvation," responded Madame
Trubetskaya.  "I wonder why they had the wedding in the evening?
It's like shop-people..."

"So much prettier.  I was married in the evening too..." answered
Madame Korsunskaya, and she sighed, remembering how charming she
had been that day, and how absurdly in love her husband was, and
how different it all was now.

"They say if anyone's best man more than ten times, he'll never
be married.  I wanted to be for the tenth time, but the post was
taken," said Count Siniavin to the pretty Princess Tcharskaya,
who had designs on him.

Princess Tcharskaya only answered with a smile.  She looked at
Kitty, thinking how and when she would stand with Count Siniavin
in Kitty's place, and how she would remind him then of his joke
today.

Shtcherbatsky told the old maid of honor, Madame Nikolaeva, that
he meant to put the crown on Kitty's chignon for luck.

"She ought not to have worn a chignon," answered Madame
Nikolaeva, who had long ago made up her mind that if the elderly
widower she was angling for married her, the wedding should be of
the simplest.  "I don't like such grandeur."

Sergey Ivanovitch was talking to Darya Dmitrievna, jestingly
assuring her that the custom of going away after the wedding was
becoming common because newly married people always felt a little
ashamed of themselves.

"Your brother may feel proud of himself.  She's a marvel of
sweetness.  I believe you're envious."

"Oh, I've got over that, Darya Dmitrievna," he answered, and a
melancholy and serious expression suddenly came over his face.

Stepan Arkadyevitch was telling his sister-in-law his joke about
divorce.

"The wreath wants setting straight," she answered, not hearing
him.

"What a pity she's lost her looks so," Countess Nordston said to
Madame Lvova.  "Still he's not worth her little finger, is he?"

"Oh, I like him so--not because he's my future _beau-frère_,"
answered Madame Lvova.  "And how well he's behaving!  It's so
difficult, too, to look well in such a position, not to be
ridiculous.  And he's not ridiculous, and not affected; one can
see he's moved."

"You expected it, I suppose?"

"Almost.  She always cared for him."

"Well, we shall see which of them will step on the rug first.  I
warned Kitty."

"It will make no difference," said Madame Lvova; "we're all
obedient wives; it's in our family."

"Oh, I stepped on the rug before Vassily on purpose.  And you,
Dolly?"

Dolly stood beside them; she heard them, but she did not answer.
She was deeply moved.  The tears stood in her eyes, and she could
not have spoken without crying.  She was rejoicing over Kitty and
Levin; going back in thought to her own wedding, she glanced at
the radiant figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgot all the
present, and remembered only her own innocent love.  She recalled
not herself only, but all her women-friends and acquaintances.
She thought of them on the one day of their triumph, when they
had stood like Kitty under the wedding crown, with love and hope
and dread in their hearts, renouncing the past, and stepping
forward into the mysterious future.  Among the brides that came
back to her memory, she thought too of her darling Anna, of whose
proposed divorce she had just been hearing.  And she had stood
just as innocent in orange flowers and bridal veil.  And now?
"It's terribly strange," she said to herself.  It was not merely
the sisters, the women-friends and female relations of the bride
who were following every detail of the ceremony.  Women who were
quite strangers, mere spectators, were watching it excitedly,
holding their breath, in fear of losing a single movement or
expression of the bride and bridegroom, and angrily not
answering, often not hearing, the remarks of the callous men, who
kept making joking or irrelevant observations.

"Why has she been crying?  Is she being married against her
will?"

"Against her will to a fine fellow like that?  A prince, isn't
he?"

"Is that her sister in the white satin?  Just listen how the
deacon booms out, 'And fearing her husband.'"

"Are the choristers from Tchudovo?"

"No, from the Synod."

"I asked the footman.  He says he's going to take her home to
his country place at once.  Awfully rich, they say.  That's why
she's being married to him."

"No, they're a well-matched pair."

"I say, Marya Vassilievna, you were making out those fly-away
crinolines were not being worn.  Just look at her in the puce
dress--an ambassador's wife they say she is--how her skirt
bounces out from side to side!"

"What a pretty dear the bride is--like a lamb decked with
flowers!  Well, say what you will, we women feel for our sister."

Such were the comments in the crowd of gazing women who had
succeeded in slipping in at the church doors.



Chapter 6


When the ceremony of plighting troth was over, the beadle spread
before the lectern in the middle of the church a piece of pink
silken stuff, the choir sang a complicated and elaborate psalm,
in which the bass and tenor sang responses to one another, and
the priest turning round pointed the bridal pair to the pink silk
rug.  Though both had often heard a great deal about the saying
that the one who steps first on the rug will be the head of the
house, neither Levin nor Kitty were capable of recollecting it,
as they took the few steps towards it.  They did not hear the
loud remarks and disputes that followed, some maintaining he had
stepped on first, and others that both had stepped on together.

After the customary questions, whether they desired to enter upon
matrimony, and whether they were pledged to anyone else, and
their answers, which sounded strange to themselves, a new
ceremony began.  Kitty listened to the words of the prayer,
trying to make out their meaning, but she could not.  The feeling
of triumph and radiant happiness flooded her soul more and more
as the ceremony went on, and deprived her of all power of
attention.

They prayed: "Endow them with continence and fruitfulness, and
vouchsafe that their hearts may rejoice looking upon their sons
and daughters."  They alluded to God's creation of a wife from
Adam's rib "and for this cause a man shall leave father and
mother, and cleave unto his wife, and they two shall be one
flesh," and that "this is a great mystery"; they prayed that God
would make them fruitful and bless them, like Isaac and Rebecca,
Joseph, Moses and Zipporah, and that they might look upon their
children's children.  "That's all splendid," thought Kitty,
catching the words, "all that's just as it should be," and a
smile of happiness, unconsciously reflected in everyone who
looked at her, beamed on her radiant face.

"Put it on quite," voices were heard urging when the priest had
put on the wedding crowns and Shtcherbatsky, his hand shaking in
its three-button glove, held the crown high above her head.

"Put it on!" she whispered, smiling.

Levin looked round at her, and was struck by the joyful radiance
on her face, and unconsciously her feeling infected him.  He too,
like her felt glad and happy.

They enjoyed hearing the epistle read, and the roll of the head
deacon's voice at the last verse, awaited with such impatience by
the outside public.  They enjoyed drinking out of the shallow cup
of warm red wine and water, and they were still more pleased when
the priest, flinging back his stole and taking both their hands
in his, led them round the lectern to the accompaniment of bass
voices chanting "Glory to God."

Shtcherbatsky and Tchirikov, supporting the crowns and stumbling
over the bride's train, smiling too and seeming delighted at
something, were at one moment left behind, at the next treading
on the bridal pair as the priest came to a halt.  The spark of
joy kindled in Kitty seemed to have infected everyone in the
church.  It seemed to Levin that the priest and the deacon too
wanted to smile just as he did.

Taking the crowns off their heads the priest read the last prayer
and congratulated the young people.  Levin looked at Kitty, and
he had never before seen her look as she did.  She was charming
with the new radiance of happiness in her face.  Levin longed to
say something to her, but he did not know whether it was all
over.  The priest got him out of his difficulty.  He smiled his
kindly smile and said gently, "Kiss your wife, and you kiss your
husband," and took the candles out of their hands.

Levin kissed her smiling lips with timid care, gave her his arm,
and with a new strange sense of closeness, walked out of the
church.  He did not believe, he could not believe, that it was
true.  It was only when their wondering and timid eyes met that
he believed in it, because he felt that they were one.

After supper, the same night, the young people left for the
country.



Chapter 7


Vronsky and Anna had been traveling for three months together in
Europe.  They had visited Venice, Rome, and Naples, and had just
arrived at a small Italian town where they meant to stay some
time.  A handsome head waiter, with thick pomaded hair parted
from the neck upwards, an evening coat, a broad white cambric
shirt front, and a bunch of trinkets hanging above his rounded
stomach, stood with his hands in the full curve of his pockets,
looking contemptuously from under his eyelids while he gave some
frigid reply to a gentleman who had stopped him.  Catching the
sound of footsteps coming from the other side of the entry
towards the staircase, the head waiter turned round, and seeing
the Russian count, who had taken their best rooms, he took his
hands out of his pockets deferentially, and with a bow informed
him that a courier had been, and that the business about the
palazzo had been arranged.  The steward was prepared to sign the
agreement.

"Ah!  I'm glad to hear it," said Vronsky.  "Is madame at home or
not?"

"Madame has been out for a walk but has returned now," answered
the waiter.

Vronsky took off his soft, wide-brimmed hat and passed his
handkerchief over his heated brow and hair, which had grown half
over his ears, and was brushed back covering the bald patch on
his head.  And glancing casually at the gentleman, who still
stood there gazing intently at him, he would have gone on.

"This gentleman is a Russian, and was inquiring after you," said
the head waiter.

With mingled feelings of annoyance at never being able to get
away from acquaintances anywhere, and longing to find some sort
of diversion from the monotony of his life, Vronsky looked once
more at the gentleman, who had retreated and stood still again,
and at the same moment a light came into the eyes of both.

"Golenishtchev!"

"Vronsky!"

It really was Golenishtchev, a comrade of Vronsky's in the Corps
of Pages.  In the corps Golenishtchev had belonged to the liberal
party; he left the corps without entering the army, and had never
taken office under the government.  Vronsky and he had gone
completely different ways on leaving the corps, and had only met
once since.

At that meeting Vronsky perceived that Golenishtchev had taken up
a sort of lofty, intellectually liberal line, and was
consequently disposed to look down upon Vronsky's interests and
calling in life.  Hence Vronsky had met him with the chilling and
haughty manner he so well knew how to assume, the meaning of
which was: "You may like or dislike my way of life, that's a
matter of the most perfect indifference to me; you will have to
treat me with respect if you want to know me."  Golenishtchev had
been contemptuously indifferent to the tone taken by Vronsky.
This second meeting might have been expected, one would have
supposed, to estrange them still more.  But now they beamed and
exclaimed with delight on recognizing one another.  Vronsky would
never have expected to be so pleased to see Golenishtchev, but
probably he was not himself aware how bored he was.  He forgot
the disagreeable impression of their last meeting, and with a
face of frank delight held out his hand to his old comrade.  The
same expression of delight replaced the look of uneasiness on
Golenishtchev's face.

"How glad I am to meet you!" said Vronsky, showing his strong
white teeth in a friendly smile.

"I heard the name Vronsky, but I didn't know which one.  I'm
very, very glad!"

"Let's go in.  Come, tell me what you're doing."

"I've been living here for two years.  I'm working."

"Ah!" said Vronsky, with sympathy; "let's go in."  And with the
habit common with Russians, instead of saying in Russian what he
wanted to keep from the servants, he began to speak in French.

"Do you know Madame Karenina?  We are traveling together.  I am
going to see her now," he said in French, carefully scrutinizing
Golenishtchev's face.

"Ah! I did not know" (though he did know), Golenishtchev answered
carelessly.  "Have you been here long?" he added.

"Four days," Vronsky answered, once more scrutinizing his
friend's face intently.

"Yes, he's a decent fellow, and will look at the thing properly,"
Vronsky said to himself, catching the significance of
Golenishtchev's face and the change of subject.  "I can introduce
him to Anna, he looks at it properly."

During those three months that Vronsky had spent abroad with
Anna, he had always on meeting new people asked himself how the
new person would look at his relations with Anna, and for the
most part, in men, he had met with the "proper" way of looking at
it.  But if he had been asked, and those who looked at it
"properly" had been asked, exactly how they did look at it, both
he and they would have been greatly puzzled to answer.

In reality, those who in Vronsky's opinion had the "proper" view
had no sort of view at all, but behaved in general as well-bred
persons do behave in regard to all the complex and insoluble
problems with which life is encompassed on all sides; they
behaved with propriety, avoiding allusions and unpleasant
questions.  They assumed an air of fully comprehending the import
and force of the situation, of accepting and even approving of
it, but of considering it superfluous and uncalled for to put all
this into words.

Vronsky at once divined that Golenishtchev was of this class, and
therefore was doubly pleased to see him.  And in fact,
Golenishtchev's manner to Madame Karenina, when he was taken to
call on her, was all that Vronsky could have desired.  Obviously
without the slightest effort he steered clear of all subjects
which might lead to embarrassment.

He had never met Anna before, and was struck by her beauty, and
still more by the frankness with which she accepted her position.
She blushed when Vronsky brought in Golenishtchev, and he was
extremely charmed by this childish blush overspreading her candid
and handsome face.  But what he liked particularly was the way in
which at once, as though on purpose that there might be no
misunderstanding with an outsider, she called Vronsky simply
Alexey, and said they were moving into a house they had just
taken, what was here called a palazzo.  Golenishtchev liked this
direct and simple attitude to her own position.  Looking at
Anna's manner of simple-hearted, spirited gaiety, and knowing
Alexey Alexandrovitch and Vronsky, Golenishtchev fancied that he
understood her perfectly.  He fancied that he understood what she
was utterly unable to understand: how it was that, having made
her husband wretched, having abandoned him and her son and lost
her good name, she yet felt full of spirits, gaiety, and
happiness.

"It's in the guide-book," said Golenishtchev, referring to the
palazzo Vronsky had taken.  "There's a first-rate Tintoretto
there.  One of his latest period."

"I tell you what: it's a lovely day, let's go and have another
look at it," said Vronsky, addressing Anna.

"I shall be very glad to; I'll go and put on my hat.  Would you
say it's hot?" she said, stopping short in the doorway and
looking inquiringly at Vronsky.  And again a vivid flush
overspread her face.

Vronsky saw from her eyes that she did not know on what terms he
cared to be with Golenishtchev, and so was afraid of not behaving
as he would wish.

He looked a long, tender look at her.

"No, not very," he said.

And it seemed to her that she understood everything, most of all,
that he was pleased with her; and smiling to him, she walked with
her rapid step out at the door.

The friends glanced at one another, and a look of hesitation came
into both faces, as though Golenishtchev, unmistakably admiring
her, would have liked to say something about her, and could not
find the right thing to say, while Vronsky desired and dreaded
his doing so.

"Well then," Vronsky began to start a conversation of some sort;
"so you're settled here?  You're still at the same work, then?"
he went on, recalling that he had been told Golenishtchev was
writing something.

"Yes, I'm writing the second part of the _Two Elements_," said
Golenishtchev, coloring with pleasure at the question--"that is,
to be exact, I am not writing it yet; I am preparing, collecting
materials.  It will be of far wider scope, and will touch on
almost all questions.  We in Russia refuse to see that we are the
heirs of Byzantium," and he launched into a long and heated
explanation of his views.

Vronsky at the first moment felt embarrassed at not even knowing
of the first part of the _Two Elements_, of which the author spoke
as something well known.  But as Golenishtchev began to lay down
his opinions and Vronsky was able to follow them even without
knowing the _Two Elements_, he listened to him with some interest,
for Golenishtchev spoke well.  But Vronsky was startled and
annoyed by the nervous irascibility with which Golenishtchev
talked of the subject that engrossed him.  As he went on talking,
his eyes glittered more and more angrily; he was more and more
hurried in his replies to imaginary opponents, and his face grew
more and more excited and worried.  Remembering Golenishtchev, a
thin, lively, good-natured and well-bred boy, always at the head
of the class, Vronsky could not make out the reason of his
irritability, and he did not like it.  What he particularly
disliked was that Golenishtchev, a man belonging to a good set,
should put himself on a level with some scribbling fellows, with
whom he was irritated and angry.  Was it worth it?  Vronsky
disliked it, yet he felt that Golenishtchev was unhappy, and was
sorry for him.  Unhappiness, almost mental derangement, was
visible on his mobile, rather handsome face, while without even
noticing Anna's coming in, he went on hurriedly and hotly
expressing his views.

When Anna came in in her hat and cape, and her lovely hand
rapidly swinging her parasol, and stood beside him, it was with a
feeling of relief that Vronsky broke away from the plaintive eyes
of Golenishtchev which fastened persistently upon him, and with a
fresh rush of love looked at his charming companion, full of life
and happiness.  Golenishtchev recovered himself with an effort,
and at first was dejected and gloomy, but Anna, disposed to feel
friendly with everyone as she was at that time, soon revived his
spirits by her direct and lively manner.  After trying various
subjects of conversation, she got him upon painting, of which he
talked very well, and she listened to him attentively.  They
walked to the house they had taken, and looked over it.

"I am very glad of one thing," said Anna to Golenishtchev when
they were on their way back, "Alexey will have a capital _atelier_.
You must certainly take that room," she said to Vronsky in
Russian, using the affectionately familiar form as though she saw
that Golenishtchev would become intimate with them in their
isolation, and that there was no need of reserve before him.

"Do you paint?" said Golenishtchev, turning round quickly to
Vronsky.

"Yes, I used to study long ago, and now I have begun to do a
little," said Vronsky, reddening.

"He has great talent," said Anna with a delighted smile.  "I'm no
judge, of course.  But good judges have said the same."



Chapter 8


Anna, in that first period of her emancipation and rapid return
to  health, felt herself unpardonably happy and full of the joy
of life.  The thought of her husband's unhappiness did not poison
her happiness.  On one side that memory was too awful to be
thought of.  On the other side her husband's unhappiness had
given her too much happiness to be regretted.  The memory of all
that had happened after her illness: her reconciliation with her
husband, its breakdown, the news of Vronsky's wound, his visit,
the preparations for divorce, the departure from her husband's
house, the parting from her son--all that seemed to her like a
delirious dream, from which she had waked up alone with Vronsky
abroad.  The thought of the harm caused to her husband aroused in
her a feeling like repulsion, and akin to what a drowning man
might feel who has shaken off another man clinging to him.  That
man did drown.  It was an evil action, of course, but it was the
sole means of escape, and better not to brood over these fearful
facts.

One consolatory reflection upon her conduct had occurred to her
at the first moment of the final rupture, and when now she
recalled all the past, she remembered that one reflection.  "I
have inevitably made that man wretched," she thought; "but I
don't want to profit by his misery.  I too am suffering, and
shall suffer; I am losing what I prized above everything--I am
losing my good name and my son.  I have done wrong, and so I
don't want happiness, I don't want a divorce, and shall suffer
from my shame and the separation from my child."  But, however
sincerely Anna had meant to suffer, she was not suffering.  Shame
there was not.  With the tact of which both had such a large
share, they had succeeded in avoiding Russian ladies abroad, and
so had never placed themselves in a false position, and
everywhere they had met people who pretended that they perfectly
understood their position, far better indeed than they did
themselves.  Separation from the son she loved--even that did not
cause her anguish in these early days.  The baby girl--_his_
child--was so sweet, and had so won Anna's heart, since she was
all that was left her, that Anna rarely thought of her son.

The desire for life, waxing stronger with recovered health, was
so intense, and the conditions of life were so new and pleasant,
that Anna felt unpardonably happy.  The more she got to know
Vronsky, the more she loved him.  She loved him for himself, and
for his love for her.  Her complete ownership of him was a
continual joy to her.  His presence was always sweet to her.  All
the traits of his character, which she learned to know better and
better, were unutterably dear to her.  His appearance, changed by
his civilian dress, was as fascinating to her as though she were
some young girl in love.  In everything he said, thought, and
did, she saw something particularly noble and elevated.  Her
adoration of him alarmed her indeed; she sought and could not
find in him anything not fine.  She dared not show him her sense
of her own insignificance beside him.  It seemed to her that,
knowing this, he might sooner cease to love her; and she dreaded
nothing now so much as losing his love, though she had no grounds
for fearing it.  But she could not help being grateful to him for
his attitude to her, and showing that she appreciated it.  He,
who had in her opinion such a marked aptitude for a political
career, in which he would have been certain to play a leading
part--he had sacrificed his ambition for her sake, and never
betrayed the slightest regret.  He was more lovingly respectful
to her than ever, and the constant care that she should not feel
the awkwardness of her position never deserted him for a single
instant.  He, so manly a man, never opposed her, had indeed, with
her, no will of his own, and was anxious, it seemed, for nothing
but to anticipate her wishes.  And she could not but appreciate
this, even though the very intensity of his solicitude for her,
the atmosphere of care with which he surrounded her, sometimes
weighed upon her.

Vronsky, meanwhile, in spite of the complete realization of what
he had so long desired, was not perfectly happy.  He soon felt
that the realization of his desires gave him no more than a grain
of sand out of the mountain of happiness he had expected.  It
showed him the mistake men make in picturing to themselves
happiness as the realization of their desires.  For a time after
joining his life to hers, and putting on civilian dress, he had
felt all the delight of freedom in general of which he had known
nothing before, and of freedom in his love,--and he was content,
but not for long.  He was soon aware that there was springing up
in his heart a desire for desires--_ennui_.  Without conscious
intention he began to clutch at every passing caprice, taking it
for a desire and an object.  Sixteen hours of the day must be
occupied in some way, since they were living abroad in complete
freedom, outside the conditions of social life which filled up
time in Petersburg.  As for the amusements of bachelor existence,
which had provided Vronsky with entertainment on previous tours
abroad, they could not be thought of, since the sole attempt of
the sort had led to a sudden attack of depression in Anna, quite
out of proportion with the cause--a late supper with bachelor
