him; and excusing himself to the ladies, he went to meet him.

Going round a hole where the workmen were slaking lime, he stood
still with the architect and began talking rather warmly.

"The front is still too low," he said to Anna, who had asked what
was the matter.

"I said the foundation ought to be raised," said Anna.

"Yes, of course it would have been much better, Anna Arkadyevna,"
said the architect, "but now it's too late."

"Yes, I take a great interest in it," Anna answered Sviazhsky,
who was expressing his surprise at her knowledge of architecture.
"This new building ought to have been in harmony with the
hospital.  It was an afterthought, and was begun without a plan."

Vronsky, having finished his talk with the architect, joined the
ladies, and led them inside the hospital.

Although they were still at work on the cornices outside and were
painting on the ground floor, upstairs almost all the rooms were
finished.  Going up the broad cast-iron staircase to the landing,
they walked into the first large room.  The walls were stuccoed
to look like marble, the huge plate-glass windows were already
in, only the parquet floor was not yet finished, and the
carpenters, who were planing a block of it, left their work,
taking off the bands that fastened their hair, to greet the
gentry.

"This is the reception room," said Vronsky.  "Here there will be
a desk, tables, and benches, and nothing more."

"This way; let us go in here.  Don't go near the window," said
Anna, trying the paint to see if it were dry.  "Alexey, the
paint's dry already," she added.

From the reception room they went into the corridor.  Here
Vronsky showed them the mechanism for ventilation on a novel
system.  Then he showed them marble baths, and beds with
extraordinary springs.  Then he showed them the wards one after
another, the storeroom, the linen room, then the heating stove
of a new pattern, then the trolleys, which would make no noise as
they carried everything needed along the corridors, and many
other things.  Sviazhsky, as a connoisseur in the latest
mechanical improvements, appreciated everything fully.  Dolly
simply wondered at all she had not seen before, and, anxious to
understand it all, made minute inquiries about everything, which
gave Vronsky great satisfaction.

"Yes, I imagine that this will be the solitary example of a
properly fitted hospital in Russia," said Sviazhsky.

"And won't you have a lying-in ward?" asked Dolly.  "That's so
much needed in the country.  I have often..."

In spite of his usual courtesy, Vronsky interrupted her.

"This is not a lying-in home, but a hospital for the sick, and is
intended for all diseases, except infectious complaints," he
said.  "Ah! look at this," and he rolled up to Darya Alexandrovna
an invalid chair that had just been ordered for the
convalescents.  "Look."  He sat down in the chair and began
moving it.  "The patient can't walk--still too weak, perhaps, or
something wrong with his legs, but he must have air, and he
moves, rolls himself along...."

Darya Alexandrovna was interested by everything.  She liked
everything very much, but most of all she liked Vronsky himself
with his natural, simple-hearted eagerness.  "Yes, he's a very
nice, good man," she thought several times, not hearing what he
said, but looking at him and penetrating into his expression,
while she mentally put herself in Anna's place.  She liked him so
much just now with his eager interest that she saw how Anna could
be in love with him.



Chapter 21


"No, I think the princess is tired, and horses don't interest
her," Vronsky said to Anna, who wanted to go on to the stables,
where Sviazhsky wished to see the new stallion.  "You go on,
while I escort the princess home, and we'll have a little talk,"
he said, "if you would like that?" he added, turning to her.

"I know nothing about horses, and I shall be delighted,"
answered Darya Alexandrovna, rather astonished.

She saw by Vronsky's face that he wanted something from her.  She
was not mistaken.  As soon as they had passed through the little
gate back into the garden, he looked in the direction Anna had
taken, and having made sure that she could neither hear nor see
them, he began:

"You guess that I have something I want to say to you," he said,
looking at her with laughing eyes.  "I am not wrong in believing
you to be a friend of Anna's."  He took off his hat, and taking
out his handkerchief, wiped his head, which was growing bald.

Darya Alexandrovna made no answer, and merely stared at him with
dismay.  When she was left alone with him, she suddenly felt
afraid; his laughing eyes and stern expression scared her.

The most diverse suppositions as to what he was about to speak of
to her flashed into her brain.  "He is going to beg me to come to
stay with them with the children, and I shall have to refuse; or
to create a set that will receive Anna in Moscow....  Or isn't it
Vassenka Veslovsky and his relations with Anna?  Or perhaps about
Kitty, that he feels he was to blame?"  All her conjectures were
unpleasant, but she did not guess what he really wanted to talk
about to her.

"You have so much influence with Anna, she is so fond of you," he
said; "do help me."

Darya Alexandrovna looked with timid inquiry into his energetic
face, which under the lime-trees was continually being lighted up
in patches by the sunshine, and then passing into complete shadow
again.  She waited for him to say more, but he walked in silence
beside her, scratching with his cane in the gravel.

"You have come to see us, you, the only woman of Anna's former
friends--I don't count Princess Varvara--but I know that you have
done this not because you regard our position as normal, but
because, understanding all the difficulty of the position, you
still love her and want to be a help to her.  Have I understood
you rightly?" he asked, looking round at her.

"Oh, yes," answered Darya Alexandrovna, putting down her
sunshade, "but..."

"No," he broke in, and unconsciously, oblivious of the awkward
position into which he was putting his companion, he stopped
abruptly, so that she had to stop short too.  "No one feels more
deeply and intensely than I do all the difficulty of Anna's
position; and that you may well understand, if you do me the
honor of supposing I have any heart.  I am to blame for that
position, and that is why I feel it."

"I understand," said Darya Alexandrovna, involuntarily admiring
the sincerity and firmness with which he said this.  "But just
because you feel yourself responsible, you exaggerate it, I am
afraid," she said.  "Her position in the world is difficult, I
can well understand."

"In the world it is hell!" he brought out quickly, frowning
darkly.  "You can't imagine moral sufferings greater than what
she went through in Petersburg in that fortnight...and I beg you
to believe it."

"Yes, but here, so long as neither Anna...nor you miss
society..."

"Society!" he said contemptuously, "how could I miss society?"

"So far--and it may be so always--you are happy and at peace.  I
see in Anna that she is happy, perfectly happy, she has had time
to tell me so much already," said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling;
and involuntarily, as she said this, at the same moment a doubt
entered her mind whether Anna really were happy.

But Vronsky, it appeared, had no doubts on that score.

"Yes, yes," he said, "I know that she has revived after all her
sufferings; she is happy.  She is happy in the present.  But
I?...  I am afraid of what is before us...I beg your pardon, you
would like to walk on?"

"No, I don't mind."

"Well, then, let us sit here."

Darya Alexandrovna sat down on a garden seat in a corner of the
avenue.  He stood up facing her.

"I see that she is happy," he repeated, and the doubt whether she
were happy sank more deeply into Darya Alexandrovna's mind.  "But
can it last?  Whether we have acted rightly or wrongly is another
question, but the die is cast," he said, passing from Russian to
French, "and we are bound together for life.  We are united by
all the ties of love that we hold most sacred.  We have a child,
we may have other children.  But the law and all the conditions
of our position are such that thousands of complications arise
which she does not see and does not want to see.  And that one
can well understand.  But I can't help seeing them.  My daughter
is by law not my daughter, but Karenin's.  I cannot bear this
falsity!" he said, with a vigorous gesture of refusal, and he
looked with gloomy inquiry towards Darya Alexandrovna.

She made no answer, but simply gazed at him.  He went on:

"One day a son may be born, my son, and he will be legally a
Karenin; he will not be the heir of my name nor of my property,
and however happy we may be in our home life and however many
children we may have, there will be no real tie between us.  They
will be Karenins.  You can understand the bitterness and horror
of this position!  I have tried to speak of this to Anna.  It
irritates her.  She does not understand, and to her I cannot
speak plainly of all this.  Now look at another side.  I am
happy, happy in her love, but I must have occupation.  I have
found occupation, and am proud of what I am doing and consider it
nobler than the pursuits of my former companions at court and in
the army.  And most certainly I would not change the work I am
doing for theirs.  I am working here, settled in my own place,
and I am happy and contented, and we need nothing more to make
us happy.  I love my work here.  _Ce n'est pas un pis-aller,_
on the contrary..."

Darya Alexandrovna noticed that at this point in his explanation
he grew confused, and she did not quite understand this
digression, but she felt that having once begun to speak of
matters near his heart, of which he could not speak to Anna, he
was now making a clean breast of everything, and that the
question of his pursuits in the country fell into the same
category of matters near his heart, as the question of his
relations with Anna.

"Well, I will go on," he said, collecting himself.  "The great
thing is that as I work I want to have a conviction that what I
am doing will not die with me, that I shall have heirs to come
after me,--and this I have not.  Conceive the position of a man
who knows that his children, the children of the woman he loves,
will not be his, but will belong to someone who hates them and
cares nothing about them!  It is awful!"

He paused, evidently much moved.

"Yes, indeed, I see that.  But what can Anna do?" queried Darya
Alexandrovna.

"Yes, that brings me to the object of my conversation," he said,
calming himself with an effort.  "Anna can, it depends on
her....  Even to petition the Tsar for legitimization, a divorce
is essential.  And that depends on Anna.  Her husband agreed to a
divorce--at that time your husband had arranged it completely.
And now, I know, he would not refuse it.  It is only a matter of
writing to him.  He said plainly at that time that if she
expressed the desire, he would not refuse.  Of course," he said
gloomily, "it is one of those Pharisaical cruelties of which only
such heartless men are capable.  He knows what agony any
recollection of him must give her, and knowing her, he must have
a letter from her.  I can understand that it is agony to her.
But the matter is of such importance, that one must _passer
pardessus toutes ces finesses de sentiment.  Il y va du bonheur
et de l'existence d'Anne et de ses enfants._  I won't speak of
myself, though it's hard for me, very hard," he said, with an
expression as though he were threatening someone for its being
hard for him.  "And so it is, princess, that I am shamelessly
clutching at you as an anchor of salvation.  Help me to persuade
her to write to him and ask for a divorce."

"Yes, of course," Darya Alexandrovna said dreamily, as she
vividly recalled her last interview with Alexey Alexandrovitch.
"Yes, of course," she repeated with decision, thinking of Anna.

"Use your influence with her, make her write.  I don't like--I'm
almost unable to speak about this to her."

"Very well, I will talk to her.  But how is it she does not
think of it herself?" said Darya Alexandrovna, and for some
reason she suddenly at that point recalled Anna's strange new
habit of half-closing her eyes.  And she remembered that Anna
drooped her eyelids just when the deeper questions of life were
touched upon.  "Just as though she half-shut her eyes to her own
life, so as not to see everything," thought Dolly.  "Yes, indeed,
for my own sake and for hers I will talk to her," Dolly said in
reply to his look of gratitude.

They got up and walked to the house.



Chapter 22


When Anna found Dolly at home before her, she looked intently in
her eyes, as though questioning her about the talk she had had
with Vronsky, but she made no inquiry in words.

"I believe it's dinner time," she said.  "We've not seen each
other at all yet.  I am reckoning on the evening.  Now I want to
go and dress.  I expect you do too; we all got splashed at the
buildings."

Dolly went to her room and she felt amused.  To change her dress
was impossible, for she had already put on her best dress.  But
in order to signify in some way her preparation for dinner, she
asked the maid to brush her dress, changed her cuffs and tie, and
put some lace on her head.

"This is all I can do," she said with a smile to Anna, who came
in to her in a third dress, again of extreme simplicity.

"Yes, we are too formal here," she said, as it were apologizing
for her magnificence.  "Alexey is delighted at your visit, as he
rarely is at anything.  He has completely lost his heart to you,"
she added.  "You're not tired?"

There was no time for talking about anything before dinner.
Going into the drawing room they found Princess Varvara already
there, and the gentlemen of the party in black frock-coats.  The
architect wore a swallow-tail coat.  Vronsky presented the
doctor and the steward to his guest.  The architect he had
already introduced to her at the hospital.

A stout butler, resplendent with a smoothly shaven round chin and
a starched white cravat, announced that dinner was ready, and the
ladies got up.  Vronsky asked Sviazhsky to take in Anna
Arkadyevna, and himself offered his arm to Dolly.  Veslovsky was
before Tushkevitch in offering his arm to Princess Varvara, so
that Tushkevitch with the steward and the doctor walked in alone.

The dinner, the dining room, the service, the waiting at table,
the wine, and the food, were not simply in keeping with the
general tone of modern luxury throughout all the house, but
seemed even more sumptuous and modern.  Darya Alexandrovna
watched this luxury which was novel to her, and as a good
housekeeper used to managing a household--although she never
dreamed of adapting anything she saw to her own household, as it
was all in a style of luxury far above her own manner of
living--she could not help scrutinizing every detail, and
wondering how and by whom it was all done.  Vassenka Veslovsky,
her husband, and even Sviazhsky, and many other people she knew,
would never have considered this question, and would have readily
believed what every well-bred host tries to make his guests feel,
that is, that all that is well-ordered in his house has cost him,
the host, no trouble whatever, but comes of itself.  Darya
Alexandrovna was well aware that even porridge for the children's
breakfast does not come of itself, and that therefore, where so
complicated and magnificent a style of luxury was maintained,
someone must give earnest attention to its organization.  And
from the glance with which Alexey Kirillovitch scanned the table,
from the way he nodded to the butler, and offered Darya
Alexandrovna her choice between cold soup and hot soup, she saw
that it was all organized and maintained by the care of the
master of the house himself.  It was evident that it all rested
no more upon Anna than upon Veslovsky.  She, Sviazhsky, the
princess, and Veslovsky, were equally guests, with light hearts
enjoying what had been arranged for them.

Anna was the hostess only in conducting the conversation.  The
conversation was a difficult one for the lady of the house at a
small table with persons present, like the steward and the
architect, belonging to a completely different world, struggling
not to be overawed by an elegance to which they were
unaccustomed, and unable to sustain a large share in the general
conversation.  But this difficult conversation Anna directed with
her usual tact and naturalness, and indeed she did so with actual
enjoyment, as Darya Alexandrovna observed.  The conversation
began about the row Tushkevitch and Veslovsky had taken alone
together in the boat, and Tushkevitch began describing the last
boat races in Petersburg at the Yacht Club.  But Anna, seizing
the first pause, at once turned to the architect to draw him out
of his silence.

"Nikolay Ivanitch was struck," she said, meaning Sviazhsky, "at
the progress the new building had made since he was here last;
but I am there every day, and every day I wonder at the rate at
which it grows."

"It's first-rate working with his excellency," said the architect
with a smile (he was respectful and composed, though with a sense
of his own dignity).  "It's a very different matter to have to do
with the district authorities.  Where one would have to write out
sheaves of papers, here I call upon the count, and in three words
we settle the business."

"The American way of doing business," said Sviazhsky, with a
smile.

"Yes, there they build in a rational fashion..."

The conversation passed to the misuse of political power in the
United States, but Anna quickly brought it round to another
topic, so as to draw the steward into talk.

"Have you ever seen a reaping machine?" she said, addressing
Darya Alexandrovna.  "We had just ridden over to look at one when
we met.  It's the first time I ever saw one."

"How do they work?" asked Dolly.

"Exactly like little scissors.  A plank and a lot of little
scissors.  Like this."

Anna took a knife and fork in her beautiful white hands covered
with rings, and began showing how the machine worked.  It was
clear that she saw nothing would be understood from her
explanation; but aware that her talk was pleasant and her hands
beautiful she went on explaining.

"More like little penknives," Veslovsky said playfully, never
taking his eyes off her.

Anna gave a just perceptible smile, but made no answer.  "Isn't
it true, Karl Fedoritch, that it's just like little scissors?"
she said to the steward.

"_Oh, ja,_" answered the German.  _"Es it ein ganz einfaches Ding,"_
and he began to explain the construction of the machine.

"It's a pity it doesn't bind too.  I saw one at the Vienna
exhibition, which binds with a wire," said Sviazhsky.  "They
would be more profitable in use."

_"Es kommt drauf an....  Der Preis vom Draht muss ausgerechnet
werden."_  And the German, roused from his taciturnity, turned to
Vronsky.  _"Das lässt sich ausrechnen, Erlaucht."_  The German was
just feeling in the pocket where were his pencil and the
notebook he always wrote in, but recollecting that he was at a
dinner, and observing Vronsky's chilly glance, he checked
himself.  _"Zu compliziert, macht zu viel Klopot,"_ he concluded.

_"Wünscht man Dochots, so hat man auch Klopots,"_ said Vassenka
Veslovsky, mimicking the German.  _"J'adore l'allemand,"_ he
addressed Anna again with the same smile.

_"Cessez,"_ she said with playful severity.

"We expected to find you in the fields, Vassily Semyonitch," she
said to the doctor, a sickly-looking man; "have you been there?"

"I went there, but I had taken flight," the doctor answered
with gloomy jocoseness.

"Then you've taken a good constitutional?"

"Splendid!"

"Well, and how was the old woman?  I hope it's not typhus?"

"Typhus it is not, but it's taking a bad turn."

"What a pity!" said Anna, and having thus paid the dues of
civility to her domestic circle, she turned to her own friends.

"It would be a hard task, though, to construct a machine from
your description, Anna Arkadyevna," Sviazhsky said jestingly.

"Oh, no, why so?" said Anna with a smile that betrayed that she
knew there was something charming in her disquisitions upon the
machine that had been noticed by Sviazhsky.  This new trait of
girlish coquettishness made an unpleasant impression on Dolly.

"But Anna Arkadyevna's knowledge of architecture is marvelous,"
said Tushkevitch.

"To be sure, I heard Anna Arkadyevna talking yesterday about
plinths and damp-courses," said Veslovsky.  "Have I got it
right?"

"There's nothing marvelous about it, when one sees and hears so
much of it," said Anna.  "But, I dare say, you don't even know
what houses are made of?"

Darya Alexandrovna saw that Anna disliked the tone of raillery
that existed between her and Veslovsky, but fell in with it
against her will.

Vronsky acted in this matter quite differently from Levin.  He
obviously attached no significance to Veslovsky's chattering; on
the contrary, he encouraged his jests.

"Come now, tell us, Veslovsky, how are the stones held together?"

"By cement, of course."

"Bravo!  And what is cement?"

"Oh, some sort of paste...no, putty," said Veslovsky, raising
a general laugh.

The company at dinner, with the exception of the doctor, the
architect, and the steward, who remained plunged in gloomy
silence, kept up a conversation that never paused, glancing off
one subject, fastening on another, and at times stinging one or
the other to the quick.  Once Darya Alexandrovna felt wounded to
the quick, and got so hot that she positively flushed and
wondered afterwards whether she had said anything extreme or
unpleasant.  Sviazhsky began talking of Levin, describing his
strange view that machinery is simply pernicious in its effects
on Russian agriculture.

"I have not the pleasure of knowing this M. Levin," Vronsky said,
smiling, "but most likely he has never seen the machines he
condemns; or if he has seen and tried any, it must have been
after a queer fashion, some Russian imitation, not a machine from
abroad.  What sort of views can anyone have on such a subject?"

"Turkish views, in general," Veslovsky said, turning to Anna with
a smile.

"I can't defend his opinions," Darya Alexandrovna said, firing
up; "but I can say that he's a highly cultivated man, and if he
were here he would know very well how to answer you, though I am
not capable of doing so."

"I like him extremely, and we are great friends," Sviazhsky said,
smiling good-naturedly.  "_Mais pardon, il est un petit peu toqué;_
he maintains, for instance, that district councils and
arbitration boards are all of no use, and he is unwilling to take
part in anything."

"It's our Russian apathy," said Vronsky, pouring water from an
iced decanter into a delicate glass on a high stem; "we've no
sense of the duties our privileges impose upon us, and so we
refuse to recognize these duties."

"I know no man more strict in the performance of his duties,"
said Darya Alexandrovna, irritated by Vronsky's tone of
superiority.

"For my part," pursued Vronsky, who was evidently for some reason
or other keenly affected by this conversation, "such as I am, I
am, on the contrary, extremely grateful for the honor they have
done me, thanks to Nikolay Ivanitch" (he indicated Sviazhsky),
"in electing me a justice of the peace.  I consider that for me
the duty of being present at the session, of judging some
peasants' quarrel about a horse, is as important as anything I
can do.  And I shall regard it as an honor if they elect me for
the district council.  It's only in that way I can pay for the
advantages I enjoy as a landowner.  Unluckily they don't
understand the weight that the big landowners ought to have in
the state."

It was strange to Darya Alexandrovna to hear how serenely
confident he was of being right at his own table.  She thought
how Levin, who believed the opposite, was just as positive in his
opinions at his own table.  But she loved Levin, and so she was
on his side.

"So we can reckon upon you, count, for the coming elections?"
said Sviazhsky.  "But you must come a little beforehand, so as to
be on the spot by the eighth.  If you would do me the honor to
stop with me."

"I rather agree with your beau-frère," said Anna, "though not
quite on the same ground as he," she added with a smile.  "I'm
afraid that we have too many of these public duties in these
latter days.  Just as in old days there were so many government
functionaries that one had to call in a functionary for every
single thing, so now everyone's doing some sort of public duty.
Alexey has been here now six months, and he's a member, I do
believe, of five or six different public bodies.  _Du train que
cela va,_ the whole time will be wasted on it.  And I'm afraid
that with such a multiplicity of these bodies, they'll end in
being a mere form.  How many are you a member of, Nikolay
Ivanitch?" she turned to Sviazhsky--"over twenty, I fancy."

Anna spoke lightly, but irritation could be discerned in her
tone.  Darya Alexandrovna, watching Anna and Vronsky attentively,
detected it instantly.  She noticed, too, that as she spoke
Vronsky's face had immediately taken a serious and obstinate
expression.  Noticing this, and that Princess Varvara at once
made haste to change the conversation by talking of Petersburg
acquaintances, and remembering what Vronsky had without apparent
connection said in the garden of his work in the country, Dolly
surmised that this question of public activity was connected with
some deep private disagreement between Anna and Vronsky.

The dinner, the wine, the decoration of the table were all very
good; but it was all like what Darya Alexandrovna had seen at
formal dinners and balls which of late years had become quite
unfamiliar to her; it all had the same impersonal and constrained
character, and so on an ordinary day and in a little circle of
friends it made a disagreeable impression on her.

After dinner they sat on the terrace, then they proceeded to play
lawn tennis.  The players, divided into two parties, stood on
opposite sides of a tightly drawn net with gilt poles on the
carefully leveled and rolled croquet-ground.  Darya Alexandrovna
made an attempt to play, but it was a long time before she could
understand the game, and by the time she did understand it, she
was so tired that she sat down with Princess Varvara and simply
looked on at the players.  Her partner, Tushkevitch, gave up
playing too, but the others kept the game up for a long time.
Sviazhsky and Vronsky both played very well and seriously.  They
kept a sharp lookout on the balls served to them, and without
haste or getting in each other's way, they ran adroitly up to
them, waited for the rebound, and neatly and accurately returned
them over the net.  Veslovsky played worse than the others.  He
was too eager, but he kept the players lively with his high
spirits.  His laughter and outcries never paused.  Like the other
men of the party, with the ladies' permission, he took off his
coat, and his solid, comely figure in his white shirt-sleeves,
with his red perspiring face and his impulsive movements, made a
picture that imprinted itself vividly on the memory.

When Darya Alexandrovna lay in bed that night, as soon as she
closed her eyes, she saw Vassenka Veslovsky flying about the
croquet ground.

During the game Darya Alexandrovna was not enjoying herself.  She
did not like the light tone of raillery that was kept up all the
time between Vassenka Veslovsky and Anna, and the unnaturalness
altogether of grown-up people, all alone without children,
playing at a child's game.  But to avoid breaking up the party
and to get through the time somehow, after a rest she joined the
game again, and pretended to be enjoying it.  All that day it
seemed to her as though she were acting in a theater with actors
cleverer than she, and that her bad acting was spoiling the whole
performance.  She had come with the intention of staying two
days, if all went well.  But in the evening, during the game, she
made up her mind that she would go home next day.  The maternal
cares and worries, which she had so hated on the way, now, after
a day spent without them, struck her in quite another light, and
tempted her back to them.

When, after evening tea and a row by night in the boat, Darya
Alexandrovna went alone to her room, took off her dress, and
began arranging her thin hair for the night, she had a great
sense of relief.

It was positively disagreeable to her to think that Anna was
coming to see her immediately.  She longed to be alone with her
own thoughts.



Chapter 23


Dolly was wanting to go to bed when Anna came in to see her,
attired for the night.  In the course of the day Anna had several
times begun to speak of matters near her heart, and every time
after a few words she had stopped: "Afterwards, by ourselves,
we'll talk about everything.  I've got so much I want to tell
you," she said.

Now they were by themselves, and Anna did not know what to talk
about.  She sat in the window looking at Dolly, and going over in
her own mind all the stores of intimate talk which had seemed so
inexhaustible beforehand, and she found nothing.  At that moment
it seemed to her that everything had been said already.

"Well, what of Kitty?" she said with a heavy sigh, looking
penitently at Dolly.  "Tell me the truth, Dolly: isn't she angry
with me?"

"Angry?  Oh, no!" said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling.

"But she hates me, despises me?"

"Oh, no!  But you know that sort of thing isn't forgiven."

"Yes, yes," said Anna, turning away and looking out of the open
window.  "But I was not to blame.  And who is to blame?  What's
the meaning of being to blame?  Could it have been otherwise?
What do you think?  Could it possibly have happened that you
didn't become the wife of Stiva?"

"Really, I don't know.  But this is what I want you to tell
me..."

"Yes, yes, but we've not finished about Kitty.  Is she happy?
He's a very nice man, they say."

"He's much more than very nice.  I don't know a better man."

"Ah, how glad I am! I'm so glad! Much more than very nice," she
repeated.

Dolly smiled.

"But tell me about yourself.  We've a great deal to talk about.
And I've had a talk with..." Dolly did not know what to call
him.  She felt it awkward to call him either the count or Alexey
Kirillovitch.

"With Alexey," said Anna, "I know what you talked about.  But I
wanted to ask you directly what you think of me, of my life?"

"How am I to say like that straight off?  I really don't know."

"No, tell me all the same....  You see my life.  But you mustn't
forget that you're seeing us in the summer, when you have come to
us and we are not alone....  But we came here early in the
spring, lived quite alone, and shall be alone again, and I desire
nothing better.  But imagine me living alone without him, alone,
and that will be...I see by everything that it will often be
repeated, that he will be half the time away from home," she
said, getting up and sitting down close by Dolly.

"Of course," she interrupted Dolly, who would have answered, "of
course I won't try to keep him by force.  I don't keep him
indeed.  The races are just coming, his horses are running, he
will go.  I'm very glad.  But think of me, fancy my position....
But what's the use of talking about it?"  She smiled.  "Well,
what did he talk about with you?"

"He spoke of what I want to speak about of myself, and it's easy
for me to be his advocate; of whether there is not a possibility
...whether you could not..." (Darya Alexandrovna hesitated)
"correct, improve your position....  You know how I look at
it....  But all the same, if possible, you should get
married...."

"Divorce, you mean?" said Anna.  "Do you know, the only woman who
came to see me in Petersburg was Betsy Tverskaya?  You know her,
of course?  _Au fond, c'est la femme la plus depraveé qui existe._
She had an intrigue with Tushkevitch, deceiving her husband in
the basest way.  And she told me that she did not care to know me
so long as my position was irregular.  Don't imagine I would
compare...I know you, darling.  But I could not help
remembering....  Well, so what did he say to you?" she repeated.

"He said that he was unhappy on your account and his own.
Perhaps you will say that it's egoism, but what a legitimate and
noble egoism.  He wants first of all to legitimize his daughter,
and to be your husband, to have a legal right to you."

"What wife, what slave can be so utterly a slave as I, in my
position?" she put in gloomily.

"The chief thing he desires...he desires that you should not
suffer."

"That's impossible.  Well?"

"Well, and the most legitimate desire--he wishes that your
children should have a name."

"What children?" Anna said, not looking at Dolly, and half
closing her eyes.

"Annie and those to come..."

"He need not trouble on that score; I shall have no more
children."

"How can you tell that you won't?"

"I shall not, because I don't wish it." And, in spite of all her
emotion, Anna smiled, as she caught the naïve expression of
curiosity, wonder, and horror on Dolly's face.

"The doctor told me after my illness..."

"Impossible!" said Dolly, opening her eyes wide.

For her this was one of those discoveries the consequences and
deductions from which are so immense that all that one feels for
the first instant is that it is impossible to take it all in, and
that one will have to reflect a great, great deal upon it.

This discovery, suddenly throwing light on all those families of
one or two children, which had hitherto been so incomprehensible
to her, aroused so many ideas, reflections, and contradictory
emotions, that she had nothing to say, and simply gazed with
wide-open eyes of wonder at Anna.  This was the very thing she
had been dreaming of, but now learning that it was possible, she
was horrified.  She felt that it was too simple a solution of too
complicated a problem.

_"N'est-ce pas immoral?"_ was all she said, after a brief pause.

"Why so?  Think, I have a choice between two alternatives: either
to be with child, that is an invalid, or to be the friend and
companion of my husband--practically my husband," Anna said in a
tone intentionally superficial and frivolous.

"Yes, yes," said Darya Alexandrovna, hearing the very arguments
she had used to herself, and not finding the same force in them
as before.

"For you, for other people," said Anna, as though divining her
thoughts, "there may be reason to hesitate; but for me....  You
must consider, I am not his wife; he loves me as long as he
loves me.  And how am I to keep his love?  Not like this!"

She moved her white hands in a curve before her waist with
extraordinary rapidity, as happens during moments of excitement;
ideas and memories rushed into Darya Alexandrovna's head.  "I,"
she thought, "did not keep my attraction for Stiva; he left me
for others, and the first woman for whom he betrayed me did not
keep him by being always pretty and lively.  He deserted her and
took another.  And can Anna attract and keep Count Vronsky in
that way?  If that is what he looks for, he will find dresses and
manners still more attractive and charming.  And however white
and beautiful her bare arms are, however beautiful her full
figure and her eager face under her black curls, he will find
something better still, just as my disgusting, pitiful, and
charming husband does."

Dolly made no answer, she merely sighed.  Anna noticed this sigh,
indicating dissent, and she went on.  In her armory she had other
arguments so strong that no answer could be made to them.

"Do you say that it's not right?  But you must consider," she
went on; "you forget my position.  How can I desire children?
I'm not speaking of the suffering, I'm not afraid of that.  Think
only, what are my children to be?  Ill-fated children, who will
have to bear a stranger's name.  For the very fact of their birth
they will be forced to be ashamed of their mother, their father,
their birth."

"But that is just why a divorce is necessary."  But Anna did not
hear her.  She longed to give utterance to all the arguments with
which she had so many times convinced herself.

"What is reason given me for, if I am not to use it to avoid
bringing unhappy beings into the world!"  She looked at Dolly,
but without waiting for a reply she went on:

"I should always feel I had wronged these unhappy children," she
said.  "If they are not, at any rate they are not unhappy; while
if they are unhappy, I alone should be to blame for it."

These were the very arguments Darya Alexandrovna had used in her
own reflections; but she heard them without understanding them.
"How can one wrong creatures that don't exist?" she thought.  And
all at once the idea struck her: could it possibly, under any
circumstances, have been better for her favorite Grisha if he had
never existed?  And this seemed to her so wild, so strange, that
she shook her head to drive away this tangle of whirling, mad
ideas.

"No, I don't know; it's not right," was all she said, with an
expression of disgust on her face.

"Yes, but you mustn't forget that you and I....  And besides
that," added Anna, in spite of the wealth of her arguments and
the poverty of Dolly's objections, seeming still to admit that it
was not right, "don't forget the chief point, that I am not now
in the same position as you.  For you the question is:  do you
desire not to have any more children; while for me it is: do I
desire to have them?  And that's a great difference.  You must
see that I can't desire it in my position."

Darya Alexandrovna made no reply.  She suddenly felt that she had
got far away from Anna; that there lay between them a barrier of
questions on which they could never agree, and about which it was
better not to speak.



Chapter 24


"Then there is all the more reason for you to legalize your
position, if possible," said Dolly.

"Yes, if possible," said Anna, speaking all at once in an utterly
different tone, subdued and mournful.

"Surely you don't mean a divorce is impossible?  I was told your
husband had consented to it."

"Dolly, I don't want to talk about that."

"Oh, we won't then," Darya Alexandrovna hastened to say, noticing
the expression of suffering on Anna's face.  "All I see is that
you take too gloomy a view of things."

"I?  Not at all!  I'm always bright and happy.  You see, _je fais
des passions._  Veslovsky..."

"Yes, to tell the truth, I don't like Veslovsky's tone," said
Darya Alexandrovna, anxious to change the subject.

"Oh, that's nonsense!  It amuses Alexey, and that's all; but he's
a boy, and quite under my control.  You know, I turn him as I
please.  It's just as it might be with your Grisha....  Dolly!"--
she suddenly changed the subject--"you say I take too gloomy a
view of things.  You can't understand.  It's too awful! I try not
to take any view of it at all."

"But I think you ought to.  You ought to do all you can."

"But what can I do?  Nothing.  You tell me to marry Alexey, and
say I don't think about it.  I don't think about it!" she
repeated, and a flush rose into her face.  She got up,
straightening her chest, and sighed heavily.  With her light step
she began pacing up and down the room, stopping now and then.  "I
don't think of it?  Not a day, not an hour passes that I don't
think of it, and blame myself for thinking of it...because
thinking of that may drive me mad.  Drive me mad!" she repeated.
"When I think of it, I can't sleep without morphine.  But never
mind.  Let us talk quietly.  They tell me, divorce.  In the first
place, he won't give me a divorce.  He's under the influence of
Countess Lidia Ivanovna now."

Darya Alexandrovna, sitting erect on a chair, turned her head,
following Anna with a face of sympathetic suffering.

"You ought to make the attempt," she said softly.

"Suppose I make the attempt.  What does it mean?" she said,
evidently giving utterance to a thought, a thousand times thought
over and learned by heart.  "It means that I, hating him, but
still recognizing that I have wronged him--and I consider him
magnanimous--that I humiliate myself to write to him....  Well,
suppose I make the effort; I do it.  Either I receive a
humiliating refusal or consent....  Well, I have received his
consent, say..." Anna was at that moment at the furthest end
of the room, and she stopped there, doing something to the
curtain at the window.  "I receive his consent, but my...my
son?  They won't give him up to me.  He will grow up despising
me, with his father, whom I've abandoned.  Do you see, I love...
equally, I think, but both more than myself--two creatures,
Seryozha and Alexey."

She came out into the middle of the room and stood facing Dolly,
with her arms pressed tightly across her chest.  In her white
dressing gown her figure seemed more than usually grand and
broad.  She bent her head, and with shining, wet eyes looked from
under her brows at Dolly, a thin little pitiful figure in her
patched dressing jacket and nightcap, shaking all over with
emotion.

"It is only those two creatures that I love, and one excludes the
other.  I can't have them together, and that's the only thing I
want.  And since I can't have that, I don't care about the rest.
I don't care about anything, anything.  And it will end one way
or another, and so I can't, I don't like to talk of it.  So don't
blame me, don't judge me for anything.  You can't with your pure
heart understand all that I'm suffering."  She went up, sat down
beside Dolly, and with a guilty look, peeped into her face and
took her hand.

"What are you thinking?  What are you thinking about me?  Don't
despise me.  I don't deserve contempt.  I'm simply unhappy.  If
anyone is unhappy, I am," she articulated, and turning away, she
burst into tears.

Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna said her prayers and went to bed.
She had felt for Anna with all her heart while she was speaking
to her, but now she could not force herself to think of her.  The
memories of home and of her children rose up in her imagination
with a peculiar charm quite new to her, with a sort of new
brilliance.  That world of her own seemed to her now so sweet and
precious that she would not on any account spend an extra day
outside it, and she made up her mind that she would certainly go
back next day.

Anna meantime went back to her boudoir, took a wine glass and
dropped into it several drops of a medicine, of which the
principal ingredient was morphine.  After drinking it off and
sitting still a little while, she went into her bedroom in a
soothed and more cheerful frame of mind.

When she went into the bedroom, Vronsky looked intently at her.
He was looking for traces of the conversation which he knew that,
staying so long in Dolly's room, she must have had with her.  But
in her expression of restrained excitement, and of a sort of
reserve, he could find nothing but the beauty that always
bewitched him afresh though he was used to it, the consciousness
of it, and the desire that it should affect him.  He did not want
to ask her what they had been talking of, but he hoped that she
would tell him something of her own accord.  But she only said:

"I am so glad you like Dolly.  You do, don't you?"

"Oh, I've known her a long while, you know.  She's very
good-hearted, I suppose, _mais excessivement terre-à-terre._
Still, I'm very glad to see her."

He took Anna's hand and looked inquiringly into her eyes.

Misinterpreting the look, she smiled to him.  Next morning, in
spite of the protests of her hosts, Darya Alexandrovna prepared
for her homeward journey.  Levin's coachman, in his by no means
new coat and shabby hat, with his ill-matched horses and his
coach with the patched mud-guards, drove with gloomy
determination into the covered gravel approach.

Darya Alexandrovna disliked taking leave of Princess Varvara and
the gentlemen of the party.  After a day spent together, both she
and her hosts were distinctly aware that they did not get on
together, and that it was better for them not to meet.  Only Anna
was sad.  She knew that now, from Dolly's departure, no one again
would stir up within her soul the feelings that had been roused
by their conversation.  It hurt her to stir up these feelings,
but yet she knew that that was the best part of her soul, and
that that part of her soul would quickly be smothered in the life
she was leading.

As she drove out into the open country, Darya Alexandrovna had a
delightful sense of relief, and she felt tempted to ask the two
men how they had liked being at Vronsky's, when suddenly the
coachman, Philip, expressed himself unasked:

"Rolling in wealth they may be, but three pots of oats was all
they gave us.  Everything cleared up till there wasn't a grain
left by cockcrow.  What are three pots?  A mere mouthful!  And
oats now down to forty-five kopecks.  At our place, no fear, all
comers may have as much as they can eat."

"The master's a screw," put in the counting house clerk.

"Well, did you like their horses?" asked Dolly.

"The horses!--there's no two opinions about them.  And the food
was good.  But it seemed to me sort of dreary there, Darya
Alexandrovna.  I don't know what you thought," he said, turning
his handsome, good-natured face to her.

"I thought so too.  Well, shall we get home by evening?"

"Eh, we must!"

On reaching home and finding everyone entirely satisfactory and
particularly charming, Darya Alexandrovna began with great
liveliness telling them how she had arrived, how warmly they had
received her, of the luxury and good taste in which the Vronskys
lived, and of their recreations, and she would not allow a word
to be said against them.

"One has to know Anna and Vronsky--I have got to know him better
now--to see how nice they are, and how touching," she said,
speaking now with perfect sincerity, and forgetting the vague
feeling of dissatisfaction and awkwardness she had experienced
there.



Chapter 25


Vronsky and Anna spent the whole summer and part of the winter
in the country, living in just the same condition, and still
taking no steps to obtain a divorce.  It was an understood thing
between them that they should not go away anywhere; but both
felt, the longer they lived alone, especially in the autumn,
without guests in the house, that they could not stand this
existence, and that they would have to alter it.

Their life was apparently such that nothing better could be
desired.  They had the fullest abundance of everything; they had
a child, and both had occupation.  Anna devoted just as much care
to her appearance when they had no visitors, and she did a great
deal of reading, both of novels and of what serious literature
was in fashion.  She ordered all the books that were praised in
the foreign papers and reviews she received, and read them with
that concentrated attention which is only given to what is read
in seclusion.  Moreover, every subject that was of interest to
Vronsky, she studied in books and special journals, so that he
often went straight to her with questions relating to agriculture
or architecture, sometimes even with questions relating to
horse-breeding or sport.  He was amazed at her knowledge, her
memory, and at first was disposed to doubt it, to ask for
confirmation of her facts; and she would find what he asked for
in some book, and show it to him.

The building of the hospital, too, interested her.  She did not
merely assist, but planned and suggested a great deal herself.
But her chief thought was still of herself--how far she was dear
to Vronsky, how far she could make up to him for all he had given
up.  Vronsky appreciated this desire not only to please, but to
serve him, which had become the sole aim of her existence, but at
the same time he wearied of the loving snares in which she tried
to hold him fast.  As time went on, and he saw himself more and
more often held fast in these snares, he had an ever growing
desire, not so much to escape from them, as to try whether they
hindered his freedom.  Had it not been for this growing desire to
be free, not to have scenes every time he wanted to go to the
town to a meeting or a race, Vronsky would have been perfectly
satisfied with his life.  The rôle he had taken up, the rôle of a
wealthy landowner, one of that class which ought to be the very
heart of the Russian aristocracy, was entirely to his taste; and
now, after spending six months in that character, he derived even
greater satisfaction from it.  And his management of his estate,
which occupied and absorbed him more and more, was most
successful.  In spite of the immense sums cost him by the
hospital, by machinery, by cows ordered from Switzerland, and
many other things, he was convinced that he was not wasting, but
increasing his substance.  In all matters affecting income, the
sales of timber, wheat, and wool, the letting of lands, Vronsky
was hard as a rock, and knew well how to keep up prices.  In all
operations on a large scale on this and his other estates, he
kept to the simplest methods involving no risk, and in trifling
details he was careful and exacting to an extreme degree.  In
spite of all the cunning and ingenuity of the German steward, who
would try to tempt him into purchases by making his original
estimate always far larger than really required, and then
representing to Vronsky that he might get the thing cheaper, and
so make a profit, Vronsky did not give in.  He listened to his
steward, cross-examined him, and only agreed to his suggestions
when the implement to be ordered or constructed was the very
newest, not yet known in Russia, and likely to excite wonder.
Apart from such exceptions, he resolved upon an increased outlay
only where there was a surplus, and in making such an outlay he
went into the minutest details, and insisted on getting the very
best for his money; so that by the method on which he managed his
affairs, it was clear that he was not wasting, but increasing his
substance.

In October there were the provincial elections in the Kashinsky
province, where were the estates of Vronsky, Sviazhsky,
Koznishev, Oblonsky, and a small part of Levin's land.

These elections were attracting public attention from several
circumstances connected with them, and also from the people
taking part in them.  There had been a great deal of talk about
them, and great preparations were being made for them.  Persons
who never attended the elections were coming from Moscow, from
Petersburg, and from abroad to attend these.  Vronsky had long
before promised Sviazhsky to go to them.  Before the elections
Sviazhsky, who often visited Vozdvizhenskoe, drove over to fetch
Vronsky.  On the day before there had been almost a quarrel
between Vronsky and Anna over this proposed expedition.  It was
the very dullest autumn weather, which is so dreary in the
country, and so, preparing himself for a struggle, Vronsky, with
a hard and cold expression, informed Anna of his departure as he
had never spoken to her before.  But, to his surprise, Anna
accepted the information with great composure, and merely asked
when he would be back.  He looked intently at her, at a loss to
explain this composure.  She smiled at his look.  He knew that
way she had of withdrawing into herself, and knew that it only
happened when she had determined upon something without letting
him know her plans.  He was afraid of this; but he was so anxious
to avoid a scene that he kept up appearances, and half sincerely
believed in what he longed to believe in--her reasonableness.

"I hope you won't be dull?"

"I hope not," said Anna.  "I got a box of books yesterday from
Gautier's.  No, I shan't be dull."

"She's trying to take that tone, and so much the better," he
thought, "or else it would be the same thing over and over
again."

And he set off for the elections without appealing to her for a
candid explanation.  It was the first time since the beginning of
their intimacy that he had parted from her without a full
explanation.  From one point of view this troubled him, but on
the other side he felt that it was better so.  "At first there
will be, as this time, something undefined kept back, and then
she will get used to it.  In any case I can give up anything for
her, but not my masculine independence," he thought.



Chapter 26


In September Levin moved to Moscow for Kitty's confinement.  He
had spent a whole month in Moscow with nothing to do, when Sergey
Ivanovitch, who had property in the Kashinsky province, and took
great interest in the question of the approaching elections, made
ready to set off to the elections.  He invited his brother, who
had a vote in the Seleznevsky district, to come with him.  Levin
had, moreover, to transact in Kashin some extremely important
business relating to the wardship of land and to the receiving of
certain redemption money for his sister, who was abroad.

Levin still hesitated, but Kitty, who saw that he was bored in
Moscow, and urged him to go, on her own authority ordered him the
proper nobleman's uniform, costing seven pounds.  And that seven
pounds paid for the uniform was the chief cause that finally
decided Levin to go.  He went to Kashin....

Levin had been six days in Kashin, visiting the assembly each
day, and busily engaged about his sister's business, which still
dragged on.  The district marshals of nobility were all occupied
with the elections, and it was impossible to get the simplest
thing done that depended upon the court of wardship.  The other
matter, the payment of the sums due, was met too by difficulties.
After long negotiations over the legal details, the money was at
last ready to be paid; but the notary, a most obliging person,
could not hand over the order, because it must have the signature
of the president, and the president, though he had not given over
his duties to a deputy, was at the elections.  All these worrying
negotiations, this endless going from place to place, and talking
with pleasant and excellent people, who quite saw the
unpleasantness of the petitioner's position, but were powerless
to assist him--all these efforts that yielded no result, led to a
feeling of misery in Levin akin to the mortifying helplessness
one experiences in dreams when one tries to use physical force.
He felt this frequently as he talked to his most good-natured
solicitor.  This solicitor did, it seemed, everything possible,
and strained every nerve to get him out of his difficulties.  "I
tell you what you might try," he said more than once; "go to
so-and-so and so-and-so," and the solicitor drew up a regular
plan for getting round the fatal point that hindered everything.
But he would add immediately, "It'll mean some delay, anyway, but
you might try it."  And Levin did try, and did go.  Everyone was
kind and civil, but the point evaded seemed to crop up again in
the end, and again to bar the way.  What was particularly trying,
was that Levin could not make out with whom he was struggling, to
whose interest it was that his business should not be done.  That
no one seemed to know; the solicitor certainly did not know.  If
Levin could have understood why, just as he saw why one can only
approach the booking office of a railway station in single file,
it would not have been so vexatious and tiresome to him.  But
with the hindrances that confronted him in his business, no one
could explain why they existed.

But Levin had changed a good deal since his marriage; he was
patient, and if he could not see why it was all arranged like
this, he told himself that he could not judge without knowing all
about it, and that most likely it must be so, and he tried not to
fret.

In attending the elections, too, and taking part in them, he
tried now not to judge, not to fall foul of them, but to
comprehend as fully as he could the question which was so
earnestly and ardently absorbing honest and excellent men whom he
respected.  Since his marriage there had been revealed to Levin
so many new and serious aspects of life that had previously,
through his frivolous attitude to them, seemed of no importance,
that in the question of the elections too he assumed and tried to
find some serious significance.

Sergey Ivanovitch explained to him the meaning and object of the
proposed revolution at the elections.  The marshal of the
province in whose hands the law had placed the control of so many
important public functions--the guardianship of wards (the very
department which was giving Levin so much trouble just now), the
disposal of large sums subscribed by the nobility of the
province, the high schools, female, male, and military, and
popular instruction on the new model, and finally, the district
council--the marshal of the province, Snetkov, was a nobleman of
the old school,--dissipating an immense fortune, a good-hearted
man, honest after his own fashion, but utterly without any
comprehension of the needs of modern days.  He always took, in
every question, the side of the nobility; he was positively
antagonistic to the spread of popular education, and he succeeded
in giving a purely party character to the district council which
ought by rights to be of such an immense importance.  What was
needed was to put in his place a fresh, capable, perfectly modern
man, of contemporary ideas, and to frame their policy so as from
the rights conferred upon the nobles, not as the nobility, but as
an element of the district council, to extract all the powers of
self-government that could possibly be derived from them.  In the
wealthy Kashinsky province, which always took the lead of other
provinces in everything, there was now such a preponderance of
forces that this policy, once carried through properly there,
might serve as a model for other provinces for all Russia.  And
hence the whole question was of the greatest importance.  It was
proposed to elect as marshal in place of Snetkov either
Sviazhsky, or, better still, Nevyedovsky, a former university
professor, a man of remarkable intelligence and a great friend of
Sergey Ivanovitch.

The meeting was opened by the governor, who made a speech to the
nobles, urging them to elect the public functionaries, not from
regard for persons, but for the service and welfare of their
fatherland, and hoping that the honorable nobility of the
Kashinsky province would, as at all former elections, hold their
duty as sacred, and vindicate the exalted confidence of the
monarch.

When he had finished with his speech, the governor walked out of
the hall, and the noblemen noisily and eagerly--some even
enthusiastically--followed him and thronged round him while he
put on his fur coat and conversed amicably with the marshal of
the province.  Levin, anxious to see into everything and not to
miss anything, stood there too in the crowd, and heard the
governor say: "Please tell Marya Ivanovna my wife is very sorry
she couldn't come to the Home."  And thereupon the nobles in high
good-humor sorted out their fur coats and all drove off to the
cathedral.

In the cathedral Levin, lifting his hand like the rest and
repeating the words of the archdeacon, swore with most terrible
oaths to do all the governor had hoped they would do.  Church
services always affected Levin, and as he uttered the words "I
kiss the cross," and glanced round at the crowd of young and old
men repeating the same, he felt touched.

On the second and third days there was business relating to the
finances of the nobility and the female high school, of no
importance whatever, as Sergey Ivanovitch explained, and Levin,
busy seeing after his own affairs, did not attend the meetings.
On the fourth day the auditing of the marshal's accounts took
place at the high table of the marshal of the province.  And then
there occurred the first skirmish between the new party and the
old.  The committee who had been deputed to verify the accounts
reported to the meeting that all was in order.  The marshal of
the province got up, thanked the nobility for their confidence,
and shed tears.  The nobles gave him a loud welcome, and shook
hands with him.  But at that instant a nobleman of Sergey
Ivanovitch's party said that he had heard that the committee had
not verified the accounts, considering such a verification an
insult to the marshal of the province.  One of the members of the
committee incautiously admitted this.  Then a small gentleman,
very young-looking but very malignant, began to say that it would
probably be agreeable to the marshal of the province to give an
account of his expenditures of the public moneys, and that the
misplaced delicacy of the members of the committee was depriving
him of this moral satisfaction.  Then the members of the
committee tried to withdraw their admission, and Sergey
Ivanovitch began to prove that they must logically admit either
that they had verified the accounts or that they had not, and he
developed this dilemma in detail.  Sergey Ivanovitch was answered
by the spokesman of the opposite party.  Then Sviazhsky spoke,
and then the malignant gentleman again.  The discussion lasted a
long time and ended in nothing.  Levin was surprised that they
should dispute upon this subject so long, especially as, when he
asked Sergey Ivanovitch whether he supposed that money had been
misappropriated, Sergey Ivanovitch answered:

"Oh, no!  He's an honest man.  But those old-fashioned methods of
paternal family arrangements in the management of provincial
affairs must be broken down."

On the fifth day came the elections of the district marshals.  It
was rather a stormy day in several districts.  In the Seleznevsky
district Sviazhsky was elected unanimously without a ballot, and
he gave a dinner that evening.



Chapter 27


The sixth day was fixed for the election of the marshal of the
province.

The rooms, large and small, were full of noblemen in all sorts of
uniforms.  Many had come only for that day.  Men who had not seen
each other for years, some from the Crimea, some from Petersburg,
some from abroad, met in the rooms of the Hall of Nobility.
There was much discussion around the governor's table under the
portrait of the Tsar.

The nobles, both in the larger and the smaller rooms, grouped
themselves in camps, and from their hostile and suspicious
glances, from the silence that fell upon them when outsiders
approached a group, and from the way that some, whispering
together, retreated to the farther corridor, it was evident that
each side had secrets from the other.  In appearance the noblemen
were sharply divided into two classes: the old and the new.  The
old were for the most part either in old uniforms of the
nobility, buttoned up closely, with spurs and hats, or in their
own special naval, cavalry, infantry, or official uniforms.  The
uniforms of the older men were embroidered in the old-fashioned
way with epaulets on their shoulders; they were unmistakably
tight and short in the waist, as though their wearers had grown
out of them.  The younger men wore the uniform of the nobility
with long waists and broad shoulders, unbuttoned over white
waistcoats, or uniforms with black collars and with the
embroidered badges of justices of the peace.  To the younger men
belonged the court uniforms that here and there brightened up the
crowd.

But the division into young and old did not correspond with the
division of parties.  Some of the young men, as Levin observed,
belonged to the old party; and some of the very oldest noblemen,
on the contrary, were whispering with Sviazhsky, and were
evidently ardent partisans of the new party.

Levin stood in the smaller room, where they were smoking and
taking light refreshments, close to his own friends, and
listening to what they were saying, he conscientiously exerted
all his intelligence trying to understand what was said.  Sergey
Ivanovitch was the center round which the others grouped
themselves.  He was listening at that moment to Sviazhsky and
Hliustov, the marshal of another district, who belonged to their
party.  Hliustov would not agree to go with his district to ask
Snetkov to stand, while Sviazhsky was persuading him to do so,
and Sergey Ivanovitch was approving of the plan.  Levin could not
make out why the opposition was to ask the marshal to stand whom
they wanted to supersede.

Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just been drinking and taking some
lunch, came up to them in his uniform of a gentleman of the
bedchamber, wiping his lips with a perfumed handkerchief of
bordered batiste.

"We are placing our forces," he said, pulling out his whiskers,
"Sergey Ivanovitch!"

And listening to the conversation, he supported Sviazhsky's
contention.

"One district's enough, and Sviazhsky's obviously of the
opposition," he said, words evidently intelligible to all except
Levin.

"Why, Kostya, you here too!  I suppose you're converted, eh?" he
added, turning to Levin and drawing his arm through his.  Levin
would have been glad indeed to be converted, but could not make
out what the point was, and retreating a few steps from the
speakers, he explained to Stepan Arkadyevitch his inability to
understand why the marshal of the province should be asked to
stand.

_"O sancta simplicitas!"_ said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and briefly and
clearly he explained it to Levin.  If, as at previous elections,
all the districts asked the marshal of the province to stand,
then he would be elected without a ballot.  That must not be.
Now eight districts had agreed to call upon him: if two refused
to do so, Snetkov might decline to stand at all; and then the old
party might choose another of their party, which would throw them
completely out in their reckoning.  But if only one district,
Sviazhsky's, did not call upon him to stand, Snetkov would let
himself be balloted for.  They were even, some of them, going to
vote for him, and purposely to let him get a good many votes, so
that the enemy might be thrown off the scent, and when a
candidate of the other side was put up, they too might give him
some votes.  Levin understood to some extent, but not fully, and
would have put a few more questions, when suddenly everyone
began talking and making a noise and they moved towards the big
room.

"What is it? eh? whom?" "No guarantee? whose? what?" "They won't
pass him?" "No guarantee?" "They won't let Flerov in?" "Eh,
because of the charge against him?" "Why, at this rate, they
won't admit anyone.  It's a swindle!" "The law!" Levin heard
exclamations on all sides, and he moved into the big room
together with the others, all hurrying somewhere and afraid of
missing something.  Squeezed by the crowding noblemen, he drew
near the high table where the marshal of the province, Sviazhsky,
and the other leaders were hotly disputing about something.



Chapter 28


Levin was standing rather far off.  A nobleman breathing heavily
and hoarsely at his side, and another whose thick boots were
creaking, prevented him from hearing distinctly.  He could only
hear the soft voice of the marshal faintly, then the shrill voice
of the malignant gentleman, and then the voice of Sviazhsky.
They were disputing, as far as he could make out, as to the
interpretation to be put on the act and the exact meaning of the
words: "liable to be called up for trial."

The crowd parted to make way for Sergey Ivanovitch approaching
the table.  Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till the malignant
gentleman had finished speaking, said that he thought the best
solution would be to refer to the act itself, and asked the
secretary to find the act.  The act said that in case of
difference of opinion, there must be a ballot.

Sergey Ivanovitch read the act and began to explain its meaning,
but at that point a tall, stout, round-shouldered landowner, with
dyed whiskers, in a tight uniform that cut the back of his neck,
interrupted him.  He went up to the table, and striking it with
his finger ring, he shouted loudly: "A ballot!  Put it to the
vote!  No need for more talking!"  Then several voices began to
talk all at once, and the tall nobleman with the ring, getting
more and more exasperated, shouted more and more loudly.  But it
was impossible to make out what he said.

He was shouting for the very course Sergey Ivanovitch had
proposed; but it was evident that he hated him and all his party,
and this feeling of hatred spread through the whole party and
roused in opposition to it the same vindictiveness, though in a
more seemly form, on the other side.  Shouts were raised, and for
a moment all was confusion, so that the marshal of the province
had to call for order.

"A ballot!  A ballot!  Every nobleman sees it!  We shed our blood
for our country!...  The confidence of the monarch....  No
checking the accounts of the marshal; he's not a cashier....  But
that's not the point....  Votes, please!  Beastly!..." shouted
furious and violent voices on all sides.  Looks and faces were
even more violent and furious than their words.  They expressed
the most implacable hatred.  Levin did not in the least
understand what was the matter, and he marveled at the passion
with which it was disputed whether or not the decision about
Flerov should be put to the vote.  He forgot, as Sergey
Ivanovitch explained to him afterwards, this syllogism: that it
was necessary for the public good to get rid of the marshal of
the province; that to get rid of the marshal it was necessary to
have a majority of votes; that to get a majority of votes it was
necessary to secure Flerov's right to vote; that to secure the
recognition of Flerov's right to vote they must decide on the
interpretation to be put on the act.

"And one vote may decide the whole question, and one must be
serious and consecutive, if one wants to be of use in public
life," concluded Sergey Ivanovitch.  But Levin forgot all that,
and it was painful to him to see all these excellent persons, for
whom he had a respect, in such an unpleasant and vicious state of
excitement.  To escape from this painful feeling he went away
into the other room where there was nobody except the waiters at
the refreshment bar.  Seeing the waiters busy over washing up the
crockery and setting in order their plates and wine glasses,
seeing their calm and cheerful faces, Levin felt an unexpected
sense of relief as though he had come out of a stuffy room into
the fresh air.  He began walking up and down, looking with
pleasure at the waiters.  He particularly liked the way one
gray-whiskered waiter, who showed his scorn for the other younger
ones and was jeered at by them, was teaching them how to fold up
napkins properly.  Levin was just about to enter into
conversation with the old waiter, when the secretary of the court
of wardship, a little old man whose specialty it was to know all
the noblemen of the province by name and patronymic, drew him
away.

"Please come, Konstantin Dmitrievitch," he said, "your brother's
looking for you.  They are voting on the legal point."

Levin walked into the room, received a white ball, and followed
his brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, to the table where Sviazhsky was
standing with a significant and ironical face, holding his beard
in his fist and sniffing at it.  Sergey Ivanovitch put his hand
into the box, put the ball somewhere, and making room for Levin,
stopped.  Levin advanced, but utterly forgetting what he was to
do, and much embarrassed, he turned to Sergey Ivanovitch with the
question, "Where am I to put it?"  He asked this softly, at a
moment when there was talking going on near, so that he had hoped
his question would not be overheard.  But the persons speaking
paused, and his improper question was overheard.  Sergey
Ivanovitch frowned.

"That is a matter for each man's own decision," he said severely.

Several people smiled.  Levin crimsoned, hurriedly thrust his
hand under the cloth, and put the ball to the right as it was in
his right hand.  Having put it in, he recollected that he ought
to have thrust his left hand too, and so he thrust it in though
too late, and, still more overcome with confusion, he beat a
hasty retreat into the background.

"A hundred and twenty-six for admission! Ninety-eight against!"
sang out the voice of the secretary, who could not pronounce the
letter _r_.  Then there was a laugh; a button and two nuts were
found in the box.  The nobleman was allowed the right to vote,
and the new party had conquered.

But the old party did not consider themselves conquered.  Levin
heard that they were asking Snetkov to stand, and he saw that a
crowd of noblemen was surrounding the marshal, who was saying
something.  Levin went nearer.  In reply Snetkov spoke of the
trust the noblemen of the province had placed in him, the
affection they had shown him, which he did not deserve, as his
only merit had been his attachment to the nobility, to whom he
had devoted twelve years of service.  Several times he repeated
the words: "I have served to the best of my powers with truth and
good faith, I value your goodness and thank you," and suddenly he
stopped short from the tears that choked him, and went out of the
room.  Whether these tears came from a sense of the injustice
being done him, from his love for the nobility, or from the
strain of the position he was placed in, feeling himself
surrounded by enemies, his emotion infected the assembly, the
majority were touched, and Levin felt a tenderness for Snetkov.

In the doorway the marshal of the province jostled against Levin.

"Beg pardon, excuse me, please," he said as to a stranger, but
recognizing Levin, he smiled timidly.  It seemed to Levin that he
would have liked to say something, but could not speak for
emotion.  His face and his whole figure in his uniform with the
crosses, and white trousers striped with braid, as he moved
hurriedly along, reminded Levin of some hunted beast who sees
that he is in evil case.  This expression in the marshal's face
was particularly touching to Levin, because, only the day before,
he had been at his house about his trustee business and had seen
him in all his grandeur, a kind-hearted, fatherly man.  The big
house with the old family furniture; the rather dirty, far from
stylish, but respectful footmen, unmistakably old house serfs who
had stuck to their master; the stout, good-natured wife in a cap
with lace and a Turkish shawl, petting her pretty grandchild, her
daughter's daughter; the young son, a sixth form high school boy,
coming home from school, and greeting his father, kissing his big
hand; the genuine, cordial words and gestures of the old man--all
this had the day before roused an instinctive feeling of respect
and sympathy in Levin.  This old man was a touching and pathetic
figure to Levin now, and he longed to say something pleasant to
him.

"So you're sure to be our marshal again," he said.

"It's not likely," said the marshal, looking round with a scared
expression.  "I'm worn out, I'm old.  If there are men younger
and more deserving than I, let them serve."

And the marshal disappeared through a side door.

The most solemn moment was at hand.  They were to proceed
immediately to the election.  The leaders of both parties were
reckoning white and black on their fingers.

The discussion upon Flerov had given the new party not only
Flerov's vote, but had also gained time for them, so that they
could send to fetch three noblemen who had been rendered unable
to take part in the elections by the wiles of the other party.
Two noble gentlemen, who had a weakness for strong drink, had
been made drunk by the partisans of Snetkov, and a third had been
robbed of his uniform.

On learning this, the new party had made haste, during the
dispute about Flerov, to send some of their men in a sledge to
clothe the stripped gentleman, and to bring along one of the
intoxicated to the meeting.

"I've brought one, drenched him with water," said the landowner,
who had gone on this errand, to Sviazhsky.  "He's all right?
he'll do."

"Not too drunk, he won't fall down?" said Sviazhsky, shaking his
head.

"No, he's first-rate.  If only they don't give him any more
here....  I've told the waiter not to give him anything on any
account."



Chapter 29


The narrow room, in which they were smoking and taking refreshments,
was full of noblemen.  The excitement grew more intense,
and every face betrayed some uneasiness.  The excitement was
specially keen for the leaders of each party, who knew every
detail, and had reckoned up every vote.  They were the generals
organizing the approaching battle.  The rest, like the rank and
file before an engagement, though they were getting ready for the
fight, sought for other distractions in the interval.  Some were
lunching, standing at the bar, or sitting at the table; others
were walking up and down the long room, smoking cigarettes, and
talking with friends whom they had not seen for a long while.

Levin did not care to eat, and he was not smoking; he did not
want to join his own friends, that is Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan
Arkadyevitch, Sviazhsky and the rest, because Vronsky in his
equerry's uniform was standing with them in eager conversation.
Levin had seen him already at the meeting on the previous day,
and he had studiously avoided him, not caring to greet him.  He
went to the window and sat down, scanning the groups, and
listening to what was being said around him.  He felt depressed,
especially because everyone else was, as he saw, eager, anxious,
and interested, and he alone, with an old, toothless little man
with mumbling lips wearing a naval uniform, sitting beside him,
had no interest in it and nothing to do.

"He's such a blackguard!  I have told him so, but it makes no
difference.  Only think of it!  He couldn't collect it in three
years!" he heard vigorously uttered by a round-shouldered, short,
country gentleman, who had pomaded hair hanging on his
embroidered collar, and new boots obviously put on for the
occasion, with heels that tapped energetically as he spoke.
Casting a displeased glance at Levin, this gentleman sharply
turned his back.

"Yes, it's a dirty business, there's no denying," a small
gentleman assented in a high voice.

Next, a whole crowd of country gentlemen, surrounding a stout
general, hurriedly came near Levin.  These persons were
unmistakably seeking a place where they could talk without being
overheard.

"How dare he say I had his breeches stolen!  Pawned them for
drink, I expect.  Damn the fellow, prince indeed!  He'd better
not say it, the beast!"

"But excuse me!  They take their stand on the act," was being
said in another group; "the wife must be registered as noble."

"Oh, damn your acts!  I speak from my heart.  We're all
gentlemen, aren't we?  Above suspicion."

"Shall we go on, your excellency, _fine champagne?_"

Another group was following a nobleman, who was shouting
something in a loud voice; it was one of the three intoxicated
gentlemen.

"I always advised Marya Semyonovna to let for a fair rent, for
she can never save a profit," he heard a pleasant voice say.  The
speaker was a country gentleman with gray whiskers, wearing the
regimental uniform of an old general staff-officer.  It was the
very landowner Levin had met at Sviazhsky's.  He knew him at
once.  The landowner too stared at Levin, and they exchanged
greetings.

"Very glad to see you!  To be sure!  I remember you very well.
Last year at our district marshal, Nikolay Ivanovitch's."

"Well, and how is your land doing?" asked Levin.

"Oh, still just the same, always at a loss," the landowner
answered with a resigned smile, but with an expression of
serenity and conviction that so it must be.  "And how do you come
to be in our province?" he asked.  "Come to take part in our _coup
d'etat?_" he said, confidently pronouncing the French words with a
bad accent.  "All Russia's here--gentlemen of the bedchamber,
and everything short of the ministry."  He pointed to the
imposing figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch in white trousers and his
court uniform, walking by with a general.

"I ought to own that I don't very well understand the drift of
the provincial elections," said Levin.

The landowner looked at him.

"Why, what is there to understand?  There's no meaning in it at
all.  It's a decaying institution that goes on running only by
the force of inertia.  Just look, the very uniforms tell you that
it's an assembly of justices of the peace, permanent members of
the court, and so on, but not of noblemen."

"Then why do you come?" asked Levin.

"From habit, nothing else.  Then, too, one must keep up
connections.  It's a moral obligation of a sort.  And then, to
tell the truth, there's one's own interests.  My son-in-law wants
to stand as a permanent member; they're not rich people, and he
must be brought forward.  These gentlemen, now, what do they come
for?" he said, pointing to the malignant gentleman, who was
talking at the high table.

"That's the new generation of nobility."

"New it may be, but nobility it isn't.  They're proprietors of a
sort, but we're the landowners.  As noblemen, they're cutting
their own throats."

"But you say it's an institution that's served its time."

"That it may be, but still it ought to be treated a little more
respectfully.  Snetkov, now...We may be of use, or we may not,
but we're the growth of a thousand years.  If we're laying out a
garden, planning one before the house, you know, and there you've
a tree that's stood for centuries in the very spot....  Old and
gnarled it may be, and yet you don't cut down the old fellow to
make room for the flowerbeds, but lay out your beds so as to take
advantage of the tree.  You won't grow him again in a year," he
said cautiously, and he immediately changed the conversation.
"Well, and how is your land doing?"

"Oh, not very well.  I make five per cent."

"Yes, but you don't reckon your own work.  Aren't you worth
something too?  I'll tell you my own case.  Before I took to
seeing after the land, I had a salary of three hundred pounds
from the service.  Now I do more work than I did in the service,
and like you I get five per cent. on the land, and thank God for
that.  But one's work is thrown in for nothing."

"Then why do you do it, if it's a clear loss?"

"Oh, well, one does it!  What would you have?  It's habit, and
one knows it's how it should be.  And what's more," the landowner
went on, leaning his elbows on the window and chatting on, "my
son, I must tell you, has no taste for it.  There's no doubt
he'll be a scientific man.  So there'll be no one to keep it up.
And yet one does it.  Here this year I've planted an orchard."

"Yes, yes," said Levin, "that's perfectly true.  I always feel
there's no real balance of gain in my work on the land, and yet
one does it....  It's a sort of duty one feels to the land."

"But I tell you what," the landowner pursued; "a neighbor of
mine, a merchant, was at my place.  We walked about the fields
and the garden.  'No,' said he, 'Stepan Vassilievitch,
everything's well looked after, but your garden's neglected.'
But, as a fact, it's well kept up.  'To my thinking, I'd cut down
that lime-tree.  Here you've thousands of limes, and each would
make two good bundles of bark.  And nowadays that bark's worth
something.  I'd cut down the lot.'"

"And with what he made he'd increase his stock, or buy some land
for a trifle, and let it out in lots to the peasants," Levin
added, smiling.  He had evidently more than once come across
those commercial calculations.  "And he'd make his fortune.  But
you and I must thank God if we keep what we've got and leave it
to our children."

"You're married, I've heard?" said the landowner.

"Yes," Levin answered, with proud satisfaction.  "Yes, it's
rather strange," he went on.  "So we live without making
anything, as though we were ancient vestals set to keep in a
fire."

The landowner chuckled under his white mustaches.

"There are some among us, too, like our friend Nikolay
Ivanovitch, or Count Vronsky, that's settled here lately, who try
to carry on their husbandry as though it were a factory; but so
far it leads to nothing but making away with capital on it."

"But why is it we don't do like the merchants?  Why don't we cut
down our parks for timber?" said Levin, returning to a thought
that had struck him.

"Why, as you said, to keep the fire in.  Besides that's not work
for a nobleman.  And our work as noblemen isn't done here at the
elections, but yonder, each in our corner.  There's a class
instinct, too, of what one ought and oughtn't to do.  There's the
peasants, too, I wonder at them sometimes; any good peasant tries
to take all the land he can.  However bad the land is, he'll work
it.  Without a return too.  At a simple loss."

"Just as we do," said Levin.  "Very, very glad to have met you,"
he added, seeing Sviazhsky approaching him.

"And here we've met for the first time since we met at your
place," said the landowner to Sviazhsky, "and we've had a good
talk too."

"Well, have you been attacking the new order of things?" said
Sviazhsky with a smile.

"That we're bound to do."

"You've relieved your feelings?"



Chapter 30


Sviazhsky took Levin's arm, and went with him to his own friends.
This time there was no avoiding Vronsky.  He was standing with
Stepan Arkadyevitch and Sergey Ivanovitch, and looking straight
at Levin as he drew near.

"Delighted!  I believe I've had the pleasure of meeting you...at
Princess Shtcherbatskaya's," he said, giving Levin his hand.

"Yes, I quite remember our meeting," said Levin, and blushing
crimson, he turned away immediately, and began talking to his
brother.

With a slight smile Vronsky went on talking to Sviazhsky,
obviously without the slightest inclination to enter into
conversation with Levin.  But Levin, as he talked to his brother,
was continually looking round at Vronsky, trying to think of
something to say to him to gloss over his rudeness.

"What are we waiting for now?" asked Levin, looking at Sviazhsky
and Vronsky.

"For Snetkov.  He has to refuse or to consent to stand," answered
Sviazhsky.

"Well, and what has he done, consented or not?"

"That's the point, that he's done neither," said Vronsky.

"And if he refuses, who will stand then?" asked Levin, looking at
Vronsky.

"Whoever chooses to," said Sviazhsky.

"Shall you?" asked Levin.

"Certainly not I," said Sviazhsky, looking confused, and turning
an alarmed glance at the malignant gentleman, who was standing
beside Sergey Ivanovitch.

"Who then?  Nevyedovsky?" said Levin, feeling he was putting his
foot into it.

But this was worse still.  Nevyedovsky and Sviazhsky were the two
candidates.

"I certainly shall not, under any circumstances," answered the
malignant gentleman.

This was Nevyedovsky himself.  Sviazhsky introduced him to Levin.

"Well, you find it exciting too?" said Stepan Arkadyevitch,
winking at Vronsky.  "It's something like a race.  One might bet
on it."

"Yes, it is keenly exciting," said Vronsky.  "And once taking the
thing up, one's eager to see it through.  It's a fight!" he said,
scowling and setting his powerful jaws.

"What a capable fellow Sviazhsky is!  Sees it all so clearly."

"Oh, yes!" Vronsky assented indifferently.

A silence followed, during which Vronsky--since he had to look at
something--looked at Levin, at his feet, at his uniform, then at
his face, and noticing his gloomy eyes fixed upon him, he said,
in order to say something:

"How is it that you, living constantly in the country, are not a
justice of the peace?  You are not in the uniform of one."

"It's because I consider that the justice of the peace is a silly
institution," Levin answered gloomily.  He had been all the time
looking for an opportunity to enter into conversation with
Vronsky, so as to smooth over his rudeness at their first
meeting.

"I don't think so, quite the contrary," Vronsky said, with quiet
surprise.

"It's a plaything," Levin cut him short.  "We don't want justices
of the peace.  I've never had a single thing to do with them
during eight years.  And what I have had was decided wrongly by
them.  The justice of the peace is over thirty miles from me.
For some matter of two roubles I should have to send a lawyer,
who costs me fifteen."

And he related how a peasant had stolen some flour from the
miller, and when the miller told him of it, had lodged a
complaint for slander.  All this was utterly uncalled for and
stupid, and Levin felt it himself as he said it.

"Oh, this is such an original fellow!" said Stepan Arkadyevitch
with his most soothing, almond-oil smile.  "But come along; I
think they're voting...."

And they separated.

"I can't understand," said Sergey Ivanovitch, who had observed
his brother's clumsiness, "I can't understand how anyone can be
so absolutely devoid of political tact.  That's where we Russians
are so deficient.  The marshal of the province is our opponent,
and with him you're _ami cochon_, and you beg him to stand.  Count
Vronsky, now ...I'm not making a friend of him; he's asked me
to dinner, and I'm not going; but he's one of our side--why make
an enemy of him?  Then you ask Nevyedovsky if he's going to
stand.  That's not a thing to do."

"Oh, I don't understand it at all!  And it's all such nonsense,"
Levin answered gloomily.

"You say it's all such nonsense, but as soon as you have anything
to do with it, you make a muddle."

Levin did not answer, and they walked together into the big room.

The marshal of the province, though he was vaguely conscious in
the air of some trap being prepared for him, and though he had
not been called upon by all to stand, had still made up his mind
to stand.  All was silence in the room.  The secretary announced
in a loud voice that the captain of the guards, Mihail
Stepanovitch Snetkov, would now be balloted for as marshal of the
province.

The district marshals walked carrying plates, on which were
balls, from their tables to the high table, and the election
began.

"Put it in the right side," whispered Stepan Arkadyevitch, as
with his brother Levin followed the marshal of his district to
the table.  But Levin had forgotten by now the calculations that
had been explained to him, and was afraid Stepan Arkadyevitch
might be mistaken in saying "the right side." Surely Snetkov was
the enemy.  As he went up, he held the ball in his right hand,
but thinking he was wrong, just at the box he changed to the left
hand, and undoubtedly put the ball to the left.  An adept in the
business, standing at the box and seeing by the mere action of
the elbow where each put his ball, scowled with annoyance.  It
was no good for him to use his insight.

Everything was still, and the counting of the balls was heard.
Then a single voice rose and proclaimed the numbers for and
against.  The marshal had been voted for by a considerable
majority.  All was noise and eager movement towards the doors.
Snetkov came in, and the nobles thronged round him,
congratulating him.

"Well, now is it over?" Levin asked Sergey Ivanovitch.

"It's only just beginning," Sviazhsky said, replying for Sergey
Ivanovitch with a smile.  "Some other candidate may receive more
votes than the marshal."

Levin had quite forgotten about that.  Now he could only remember
that there was some sort of trickery in it, but he was too bored
to think what it was exactly.  He felt depressed, and longed to
get out of the crowd.

As no one was paying any attention to him, and no one apparently
needed him, he quietly slipped away into the little room where
the refreshments were, and again had a great sense of comfort
when he saw the waiters.  The little old waiter pressed him to
have something, and Levin agreed.  After eating a cutlet with
beans and talking to the waiters of their former masters, Levin,
not wishing to go back to the hall, where it was all so
distasteful to him, proceeded to walk through the galleries.  The
galleries were full of fashionably dressed ladies, leaning over
the balustrade and trying not to lose a single word of what was
being said below.  With the ladies were sitting and standing
smart lawyers, high school teachers in spectacles, and officers.
Everywhere they were talking of the election, and of how worried
the marshal was, and how splendid the discussions had been.  In
one group Levin heard his brother's praises.  One lady was
telling a lawyer:

"How glad I am I heard Koznishev!  It's worth losing one's
dinner. He's exquisite!  So clear and distinct all of it!
There's not one of you in the law courts that speaks like that.
The only one is Meidel, and he's not so eloquent by a long way."

Finding a free place, Levin leaned over the balustrade and began
looking and listening.

All the noblemen were sitting railed off behind barriers
according to their districts.  In the middle of the room stood a
man in a uniform, who shouted in a loud, high voice:

"As a candidate for the marshalship of the nobility of the
province we call upon staff-captain Yevgeney Ivanovitch Apuhtin!"
A dead silence followed, and then a weak old voice was heard:
"Declined!"

"We call upon the privy councilor Pyotr Petrovitch Bol," the
voice began again.

"Declined!" a high boyish voice replied.

Again it began, and again "Declined." And so it went on for about
an hour.  Levin, with his elbows on the balustrade, looked and
listened.  At first he wondered and wanted to know what it meant;
then feeling sure that he could not make it out he began to be
bored.  Then recalling all the excitement and vindictiveness he
had seen on all the faces, he felt sad; he made up his mind to
go, and went downstairs.  As he passed through the entry to the
galleries he met a dejected high school boy walking up and down
with tired-looking eyes.  On the stairs he met a couple--a lady
running quickly on her high heels and the jaunty deputy
prosecutor.

"I told you you weren't late," the deputy prosecutor was saying
at the moment when Levin moved aside to let the lady pass.

Levin was on the stairs to the way out, and was just feeling in
his waistcoat pocket for the number of his overcoat, when the
secretary overtook him.

"This way, please, Konstantin Dmitrievitch; they are voting."

The candidate who was being voted on was Nevyedovsky, who had so
stoutly denied all idea of standing.  Levin went up to the door
of the room; it was locked.  The secretary knocked, the door
opened, and Levin was met by two red-faced gentlemen, who darted
out.

"I can't stand any more of it," said one red-faced gentleman.

After them the face of the marshal of the province was poked out.
His face was dreadful-looking from exhaustion and dismay.

"I told you not to let any one out!" he cried to the doorkeeper.

"I let someone in, your excellency!"

"Mercy on us!" and with a heavy sigh the marshal of the province
walked with downcast head to the high table in the middle of the
room, his legs staggering in his white trousers.

Nevyedovsky had scored a higher majority, as they had planned,
and he was the new marshal of the province.  Many people were
amused, many were pleased and happy, many were in ecstasies, many
were disgusted and unhappy.  The former marshal of the province
was in a state of despair, which he could not conceal.  When
Nevyedovsky went out of the room, the crowd thronged round him
and followed him enthusiastically, just as they had followed the
governor who had opened the meetings, and just as they had
followed Snetkov when he was elected.



Chapter 31


The newly elected marshal and many of the successful party dined
that day with Vronsky.

Vronsky had come to the elections partly because he was bored in
the country and wanted to show Anna his right to independence,
and also to repay Sviazhsky by his support at the election for
all the trouble he had taken for Vronsky at the district council
election, but chiefly in order strictly to perform all those
duties of a nobleman and landowner which he had taken upon
himself.  But he had not in the least expected that the election
would so interest him, so keenly excite him, and that he would be
so good at this kind of thing.  He was quite a new man in the
circle of the nobility of the province, but his success was
unmistakable, and he was not wrong in supposing that he had
already obtained a certain influence.  This influence was due to
his wealth and reputation, the capital house in the town lent him
by his old friend Shirkov, who had a post in the department of
finances and was director of a flourishing bank in Kashin; the
excellent cook Vronsky had brought from the country, and his
friendship with the governor, who was a schoolfellow of
Vronsky's--a schoolfellow he had patronized and protected indeed.
But what contributed more than all to his success was his direct,
equable manner with everyone, which very quickly made the
majority of the noblemen reverse the current opinion of his
supposed haughtiness.  He was himself conscious that, except that
