"I think I ought to tell you, Gavrila Ardalionovitch," said the prince,
suddenly, "that though I once was so ill that I really was little better
than an idiot, yet now I am almost recovered, and that, therefore, it is
not altogether pleasant to be called an idiot to my face. Of course your
anger is excusable, considering the treatment you have just experienced;
but I must remind you that you have twice abused me rather rudely. I
do not like this sort of thing, and especially so at the first time
of meeting a man, and, therefore, as we happen to be at this moment
standing at a crossroad, don't you think we had better part, you to the
left, homewards, and I to the right, here? I have twenty-five roubles,
and I shall easily find a lodging."

Gania was much confused, and blushed for shame "Do forgive me, prince!"
he cried, suddenly changing his abusive tone for one of great courtesy.
"For Heaven's sake, forgive me! You see what a miserable plight I am
in, but you hardly know anything of the facts of the case as yet. If you
did, I am sure you would forgive me, at least partially. Of course it
was inexcusable of me, I know, but--"

"Oh, dear me, I really do not require such profuse apologies," replied
the prince, hastily. "I quite understand how unpleasant your position
is, and that is what made you abuse me. So come along to your house,
after all. I shall be delighted--"

"I am not going to let him go like this," thought Gania, glancing
angrily at the prince as they walked along. "The fellow has sucked
everything out of me, and now he takes off his mask--there's something
more than appears, here we shall see. It shall all be as clear as water
by tonight, everything!"

But by this time they had reached Gania's house.

VIII.

The flat occupied by Gania and his family was on the third floor of the
house. It was reached by a clean light staircase, and consisted of seven
rooms, a nice enough lodging, and one would have thought a little too
good for a clerk on two thousand roubles a year. But it was designed
to accommodate a few lodgers on board terms, and had been taken a few
months since, much to the disgust of Gania, at the urgent request of his
mother and his sister, Varvara Ardalionovna, who longed to do something
to increase the family income a little, and fixed their hopes upon
letting lodgings. Gania frowned upon the idea. He thought it infra dig,
and did not quite like appearing in society afterwards--that society in
which he had been accustomed to pose up to now as a young man of rather
brilliant prospects. All these concessions and rebuffs of fortune,
of late, had wounded his spirit severely, and his temper had become
extremely irritable, his wrath being generally quite out of proportion
to the cause. But if he had made up his mind to put up with this sort of
life for a while, it was only on the plain understanding with his inner
self that he would very soon change it all, and have things as he
chose again. Yet the very means by which he hoped to make this change
threatened to involve him in even greater difficulties than he had had
before.

The flat was divided by a passage which led straight out of the
entrance-hall. Along one side of this corridor lay the three rooms which
were designed for the accommodation of the "highly recommended" lodgers.
Besides these three rooms there was another small one at the end of the
passage, close to the kitchen, which was allotted to General Ivolgin,
the nominal master of the house, who slept on a wide sofa, and was
obliged to pass into and out of his room through the kitchen, and up
or down the back stairs. Colia, Gania's young brother, a school-boy of
thirteen, shared this room with his father. He, too, had to sleep on
an old sofa, a narrow, uncomfortable thing with a torn rug over it; his
chief duty being to look after his father, who needed to be watched more
and more every day.

The prince was given the middle room of the three, the first being
occupied by one Ferdishenko, while the third was empty.

But Gania first conducted the prince to the family apartments. These
consisted of a "salon," which became the dining-room when required; a
drawing-room, which was only a drawing-room in the morning, and became
Gania's study in the evening, and his bedroom at night; and lastly Nina
Alexandrovna's and Varvara's bedroom, a small, close chamber which they
shared together.

In a word, the whole place was confined, and a "tight fit" for the
party. Gania used to grind his teeth with rage over the state of
affairs; though he was anxious to be dutiful and polite to his mother.
However, it was very soon apparent to anyone coming into the house, that
Gania was the tyrant of the family.

Nina Alexandrovna and her daughter were both seated in the drawing-room,
engaged in knitting, and talking to a visitor, Ivan Petrovitch Ptitsin.

The lady of the house appeared to be a woman of about fifty years of
age, thin-faced, and with black lines under the eyes. She looked ill and
rather sad; but her face was a pleasant one for all that; and from the
first word that fell from her lips, any stranger would at once conclude
that she was of a serious and particularly sincere nature. In spite of
her sorrowful expression, she gave the idea of possessing considerable
firmness and decision.

Her dress was modest and simple to a degree, dark and elderly in style;
but both her face and appearance gave evidence that she had seen better
days.

Varvara was a girl of some twenty-three summers, of middle height, thin,
but possessing a face which, without being actually beautiful, had
the rare quality of charm, and might fascinate even to the extent of
passionate regard.

She was very like her mother: she even dressed like her, which proved
that she had no taste for smart clothes. The expression of her grey eyes
was merry and gentle, when it was not, as lately, too full of thought
and anxiety. The same decision and firmness was to be observed in her
face as in her mother's, but her strength seemed to be more vigorous
than that of Nina Alexandrovna. She was subject to outbursts of temper,
of which even her brother was a little afraid.

The present visitor, Ptitsin, was also afraid of her. This was a young
fellow of something under thirty, dressed plainly, but neatly. His
manners were good, but rather ponderously so. His dark beard bore
evidence to the fact that he was not in any government employ. He could
speak well, but preferred silence. On the whole he made a decidedly
agreeable impression. He was clearly attracted by Varvara, and made no
secret of his feelings. She trusted him in a friendly way, but had not
shown him any decided encouragement as yet, which fact did not quell his
ardour in the least.

Nina Alexandrovna was very fond of him, and had grown quite confidential
with him of late. Ptitsin, as was well known, was engaged in the
business of lending out money on good security, and at a good rate of
interest. He was a great friend of Gania's.

After a formal introduction by Gania (who greeted his mother very
shortly, took no notice of his sister, and immediately marched Ptitsin
out of the room), Nina Alexandrovna addressed a few kind words to the
prince and forthwith requested Colia, who had just appeared at the door,
to show him to the "middle room."

Colia was a nice-looking boy. His expression was simple and confiding,
and his manners were very polite and engaging.

"Where's your luggage?" he asked, as he led the prince away to his room.

"I had a bundle; it's in the entrance hall."

"I'll bring it you directly. We only have a cook and one maid, so I have
to help as much as I can. Varia looks after things, generally, and
loses her temper over it. Gania says you have only just arrived from
Switzerland?"

"Yes."

"Is it jolly there?"

"Very."

"Mountains?"

"Yes."

"I'll go and get your bundle."

Here Varvara joined them.

"The maid shall bring your bed-linen directly. Have you a portmanteau?"

"No; a bundle--your brother has just gone to the hall for it."

"There's nothing there except this," said Colia, returning at this
moment. "Where did you put it?"

"Oh! but that's all I have," said the prince, taking it.

"Ah! I thought perhaps Ferdishenko had taken it."

"Don't talk nonsense," said Varia, severely. She seemed put out, and was
only just polite with the prince.

"Oho!" laughed the boy, "you can be nicer than that to ME, you know--I'm
not Ptitsin!"

"You ought to be whipped, Colia, you silly boy. If you want anything"
(to the prince) "please apply to the servant. We dine at half-past four.
You can take your dinner with us, or have it in your room, just as you
please. Come along, Colia, don't disturb the prince."

At the door they met Gania coming in.

"Is father in?" he asked. Colia whispered something in his ear and went
out.

"Just a couple of words, prince, if you'll excuse me. Don't blab over
THERE about what you may see here, or in this house as to all that about
Aglaya and me, you know. Things are not altogether pleasant in this
establishment--devil take it all! You'll see. At all events keep your
tongue to yourself for TODAY."

"I assure you I 'blabbed' a great deal less than you seem to suppose,"
said the prince, with some annoyance. Clearly the relations between
Gania and himself were by no means improving.

"Oh I well; I caught it quite hot enough today, thanks to you. However,
I forgive you."

"I think you might fairly remember that I was not in any way bound, I
had no reason to be silent about that portrait. You never asked me not
to mention it."

"Pfu! what a wretched room this is--dark, and the window looking
into the yard. Your coming to our house is, in no respect, opportune.
However, it's not MY affair. I don't keep the lodgings."

Ptitsin here looked in and beckoned to Gania, who hastily left the room,
in spite of the fact that he had evidently wished to say something more
and had only made the remark about the room to gain time. The prince had
hardly had time to wash and tidy himself a little when the door opened
once more, and another figure appeared.

This was a gentleman of about thirty, tall, broadshouldered, and
red-haired; his face was red, too, and he possessed a pair of thick
lips, a wide nose, small eyes, rather bloodshot, and with an ironical
expression in them; as though he were perpetually winking at someone.
His whole appearance gave one the idea of impudence; his dress was
shabby.

He opened the door just enough to let his head in. His head remained so
placed for a few seconds while he quietly scrutinized the room; the door
then opened enough to admit his body; but still he did not enter. He
stood on the threshold and examined the prince carefully. At last he
gave the door a final shove, entered, approached the prince, took his
hand and seated himself and the owner of the room on two chairs side by
side.

"Ferdishenko," he said, gazing intently and inquiringly into the
prince's eyes.

"Very well, what next?" said the latter, almost laughing in his face.

"A lodger here," continued the other, staring as before.

"Do you wish to make acquaintance?" asked the prince.

"Ah!" said the visitor, passing his fingers through his hair and
sighing. He then looked over to the other side of the room and around
it. "Got any money?" he asked, suddenly.

"Not much."

"How much?"

"Twenty-five roubles."

"Let's see it."

The prince took his banknote out and showed it to Ferdishenko. The
latter unfolded it and looked at it; then he turned it round and
examined the other side; then he held it up to the light.

"How strange that it should have browned so," he said, reflectively.
"These twenty-five rouble notes brown in a most extraordinary way, while
other notes often grow paler. Take it."

The prince took his note. Ferdishenko rose.

"I came here to warn you," he said. "In the first place, don't lend me
any money, for I shall certainly ask you to."

"Very well."

"Shall you pay here?"

"Yes, I intend to."

"Oh! I DON'T intend to. Thanks. I live here, next door to you; you
noticed a room, did you? Don't come to me very often; I shall see you
here quite often enough. Have you seen the general?"

"No."

"Nor heard him?"

"No; of course not."

"Well, you'll both hear and see him soon; he even tries to borrow money
from me. Avis au lecteur. Good-bye; do you think a man can possibly live
with a name like Ferdishenko?"

"Why not?"

"Good-bye."

And so he departed. The prince found out afterwards that this gentleman
made it his business to amaze people with his originality and wit, but
that it did not as a rule "come off." He even produced a bad impression
on some people, which grieved him sorely; but he did not change his ways
for all that.

As he went out of the prince's room, he collided with yet another
visitor coming in. Ferdishenko took the opportunity of making several
warning gestures to the prince from behind the new arrival's back, and
left the room in conscious pride.

This next arrival was a tall red-faced man of about fifty-five, with
greyish hair and whiskers, and large eyes which stood out of their
sockets. His appearance would have been distinguished had it not been
that he gave the idea of being rather dirty. He was dressed in an old
coat, and he smelled of vodka when he came near. His walk was effective,
and he clearly did his best to appear dignified, and to impress people
by his manner.

This gentleman now approached the prince slowly, and with a most
courteous smile; silently took his hand and held it in his own, as he
examined the prince's features as though searching for familiar traits
therein.

"'Tis he, 'tis he!" he said at last, quietly, but with much solemnity.
"As though he were alive once more. I heard the familiar name-the
dear familiar name--and, oh. I how it reminded me of the irrevocable
past--Prince Muishkin, I believe?"

"Exactly so."

"General Ivolgin--retired and unfortunate. May I ask your Christian and
generic names?"

"Lef Nicolaievitch."

"So, so--the son of my old, I may say my childhood's friend, Nicolai
Petrovitch."

"My father's name was Nicolai Lvovitch."

"Lvovitch," repeated the general without the slightest haste, and with
perfect confidence, just as though he had not committed himself the
least in the world, but merely made a little slip of the tongue. He sat
down, and taking the prince's hand, drew him to a seat next to himself.

"I carried you in my arms as a baby," he observed.

"Really?" asked the prince. "Why, it's twenty years since my father
died."

"Yes, yes--twenty years and three months. We were educated together; I
went straight into the army, and he--"

"My father went into the army, too. He was a sub-lieutenant in the
Vasiliefsky regiment."

"No, sir--in the Bielomirsky; he changed into the latter shortly before
his death. I was at his bedside when he died, and gave him my blessing
for eternity. Your mother--" The general paused, as though overcome with
emotion.

"She died a few months later, from a cold," said the prince.

"Oh, not cold--believe an old man--not from a cold, but from grief for
her prince. Oh--your mother, your mother! heigh-ho! Youth--youth! Your
father and I--old friends as we were--nearly murdered each other for her
sake."

The prince began to be a little incredulous.

"I was passionately in love with her when she was engaged--engaged to my
friend. The prince noticed the fact and was furious. He came and woke me
at seven o'clock one morning. I rise and dress in amazement; silence on
both sides. I understand it all. He takes a couple of pistols out of his
pocket--across a handkerchief--without witnesses. Why invite witnesses
when both of us would be walking in eternity in a couple of minutes? The
pistols are loaded; we stretch the handkerchief and stand opposite one
another. We aim the pistols at each other's hearts. Suddenly tears start
to our eyes, our hands shake; we weep, we embrace--the battle is one of
self-sacrifice now! The prince shouts, 'She is yours;' I cry, 'She is
yours--' in a word, in a word--You've come to live with us, hey?"

"Yes--yes--for a while, I think," stammered the prince.

"Prince, mother begs you to come to her," said Colia, appearing at the
door.

The prince rose to go, but the general once more laid his hand in a
friendly manner on his shoulder, and dragged him down on to the sofa.

"As the true friend of your father, I wish to say a few words to you,"
he began. "I have suffered--there was a catastrophe. I suffered without
a trial; I had no trial. Nina Alexandrovna my wife, is an excellent
woman, so is my daughter Varvara. We have to let lodgings because we are
poor--a dreadful, unheard-of come-down for us--for me, who should
have been a governor-general; but we are very glad to have YOU, at all
events. Meanwhile there is a tragedy in the house."

The prince looked inquiringly at the other.

"Yes, a marriage is being arranged--a marriage between a questionable
woman and a young fellow who might be a flunkey. They wish to bring this
woman into the house where my wife and daughter reside, but while I
live and breathe she shall never enter my doors. I shall lie at the
threshold, and she shall trample me underfoot if she does. I hardly
talk to Gania now, and avoid him as much as I can. I warn you of this
beforehand, but you cannot fail to observe it. But you are the son of my
old friend, and I hope--"

"Prince, be so kind as to come to me for a moment in the drawing-room,"
said Nina Alexandrovna herself, appearing at the door.

"Imagine, my dear," cried the general, "it turns out that I have nursed
the prince on my knee in the old days." His wife looked searchingly at
him, and glanced at the prince, but said nothing. The prince rose and
followed her; but hardly had they reached the drawing-room, and Nina
Alexandrovna had begun to talk hurriedly, when in came the general.
She immediately relapsed into silence. The master of the house may have
observed this, but at all events he did not take any notice of it; he
was in high good humour.

"A son of my old friend, dear," he cried; "surely you must remember
Prince Nicolai Lvovitch? You saw him at--at Tver."

"I don't remember any Nicolai Lvovitch, Was that your father?" she
inquired of the prince.

"Yes, but he died at Elizabethgrad, not at Tver," said the prince,
rather timidly. "So Pavlicheff told me."

"No, Tver," insisted the general; "he removed just before his death. You
were very small and cannot remember; and Pavlicheff, though an excellent
fellow, may have made a mistake."

"You knew Pavlicheff then?"

"Oh, yes--a wonderful fellow; but I was present myself. I gave him my
blessing."

"My father was just about to be tried when he died," said the prince,
"although I never knew of what he was accused. He died in hospital."

"Oh! it was the Kolpakoff business, and of course he would have been
acquitted."

"Yes? Do you know that for a fact?" asked the prince, whose curiosity
was aroused by the general's words.

"I should think so indeed!" cried the latter. "The court-martial came to
no decision. It was a mysterious, an impossible business, one might say!
Captain Larionoff, commander of the company, had died; his command
was handed over to the prince for the moment. Very well. This soldier,
Kolpakoff, stole some leather from one of his comrades, intending to
sell it, and spent the money on drink. Well! The prince--you understand
that what follows took place in the presence of the sergeant-major, and
a corporal--the prince rated Kolpakoff soundly, and threatened to have
him flogged. Well, Kolpakoff went back to the barracks, lay down on
a camp bedstead, and in a quarter of an hour was dead: you quite
understand? It was, as I said, a strange, almost impossible, affair.
In due course Kolpakoff was buried; the prince wrote his report, the
deceased's name was removed from the roll. All as it should be, is it
not? But exactly three months later at the inspection of the brigade,
the man Kolpakoff was found in the third company of the second battalion
of infantry, Novozemlianski division, just as if nothing had happened!"

"What?" said the prince, much astonished.

"It did not occur--it's a mistake!" said Nina Alexandrovna quickly,
looking, at the prince rather anxiously. "Mon mari se trompe," she
added, speaking in French.

"My dear, 'se trompe' is easily said. Do you remember any case at all
like it? Everybody was at their wits' end. I should be the first to say
'qu'on se trompe,' but unfortunately I was an eye-witness, and was also
on the commission of inquiry. Everything proved that it was really he,
the very same soldier Kolpakoff who had been given the usual military
funeral to the sound of the drum. It is of course a most curious
case--nearly an impossible one. I recognize that... but--"

"Father, your dinner is ready," said Varvara at this point, putting her
head in at the door.

"Very glad, I'm particularly hungry. Yes, yes, a strange
coincidence--almost a psychological--"

"Your soup'll be cold; do come."

"Coming, coming," said the general. "Son of my old friend--" he was
heard muttering as he went down the passage.

"You will have to excuse very much in my husband, if you stay with us,"
said Nina Alexandrovna; "but he will not disturb you often. He dines
alone. Everyone has his little peculiarities, you know, and some people
perhaps have more than those who are most pointed at and laughed at.
One thing I must beg of you-if my husband applies to you for payment
for board and lodging, tell him that you have already paid me. Of course
anything paid by you to the general would be as fully settled as if
paid to me, so far as you are concerned; but I wish it to be so, if you
please, for convenience' sake. What is it, Varia?"

Varia had quietly entered the room, and was holding out the portrait of
Nastasia Philipovna to her mother.

Nina Alexandrovna started, and examined the photograph intently, gazing
at it long and sadly. At last she looked up inquiringly at Varia.

"It's a present from herself to him," said Varia; "the question is to be
finally decided this evening."

"This evening!" repeated her mother in a tone of despair, but softly,
as though to herself. "Then it's all settled, of course, and there's no
hope left to us. She has anticipated her answer by the present of her
portrait. Did he show it you himself?" she added, in some surprise.

"You know we have hardly spoken to each other for a whole month. Ptitsin
told me all about it; and the photo was lying under the table, and I
picked it up."

"Prince," asked Nina Alexandrovna, "I wanted to inquire whether you have
known my son long? I think he said that you had only arrived today from
somewhere."

The prince gave a short narrative of what we have heard before, leaving
out the greater part. The two ladies listened intently.

"I did not ask about Gania out of curiosity," said the elder, at last.
"I wish to know how much you know about him, because he said just now
that we need not stand on ceremony with you. What, exactly, does that
mean?"

At this moment Gania and Ptitsin entered the room together, and Nina
Alexandrovna immediately became silent again. The prince remained seated
next to her, but Varia moved to the other end of the room; the portrait
of Nastasia Philipovna remained lying as before on the work-table. Gania
observed it there, and with a frown of annoyance snatched it up and
threw it across to his writing-table, which stood at the other end of
the room.

"Is it today, Gania?" asked Nina Alexandrovna, at last.

"Is what today?" cried the former. Then suddenly recollecting himself,
he turned sharply on the prince. "Oh," he growled, "I see, you are here,
that explains it! Is it a disease, or what, that you can't hold your
tongue? Look here, understand once for all, prince--"

"I am to blame in this, Gania--no one else," said Ptitsin.

Gania glanced inquiringly at the speaker.

"It's better so, you know, Gania--especially as, from one point of view,
the matter may be considered as settled," said Ptitsin; and sitting
down a little way from the table he began to study a paper covered with
pencil writing.

Gania stood and frowned, he expected a family scene. He never thought of
apologizing to the prince, however.

"If it's all settled, Gania, then of course Mr. Ptitsin is right," said
Nina Alexandrovna. "Don't frown. You need not worry yourself, Gania;
I shall ask you no questions. You need not tell me anything you don't
like. I assure you I have quite submitted to your will." She said all
this, knitting away the while as though perfectly calm and composed.

Gania was surprised, but cautiously kept silence and looked at his
mother, hoping that she would express herself more clearly. Nina
Alexandrovna observed his cautiousness and added, with a bitter smile:

"You are still suspicious, I see, and do not believe me; but you may
be quite at your ease. There shall be no more tears, nor questions--not
from my side, at all events. All I wish is that you may be happy, you
know that. I have submitted to my fate; but my heart will always be
with you, whether we remain united, or whether we part. Of course I only
answer for myself--you can hardly expect your sister--"

"My sister again," cried Gania, looking at her with contempt and almost
hate. "Look here, mother, I have already given you my word that I shall
always respect you fully and absolutely, and so shall everyone else in
this house, be it who it may, who shall cross this threshold."

Gania was so much relieved that he gazed at his mother almost
affectionately.

"I was not at all afraid for myself, Gania, as you know well. It was not
for my own sake that I have been so anxious and worried all this time!
They say it is all to be settled to-day. What is to be settled?"

"She has promised to tell me tonight at her own house whether she
consents or not," replied Gania.

"We have been silent on this subject for three weeks," said his mother,
"and it was better so; and now I will only ask you one question. How can
she give her consent and make you a present of her portrait when you do
not love her? How can such a--such a--"

"Practised hand--eh?"

"I was not going to express myself so. But how could you so blind her?"

Nina Alexandrovna's question betrayed intense annoyance. Gania waited a
moment and then said, without taking the trouble to conceal the irony of
his tone:

"There you are, mother, you are always like that. You begin by promising
that there are to be no reproaches or insinuations or questions, and
here you are beginning them at once. We had better drop the subject--we
had, really. I shall never leave you, mother; any other man would cut
and run from such a sister as this. See how she is looking at me at this
moment! Besides, how do you know that I am blinding Nastasia Philipovna?
As for Varia, I don't care--she can do just as she pleases. There,
that's quite enough!"

Gania's irritation increased with every word he uttered, as he walked up
and down the room. These conversations always touched the family sores
before long.

"I have said already that the moment she comes in I go out, and I shall
keep my word," remarked Varia.

"Out of obstinacy" shouted Gania. "You haven't married, either, thanks
to your obstinacy. Oh, you needn't frown at me, Varvara! You can go at
once for all I care; I am sick enough of your company. What, you are
going to leave us are you, too?" he cried, turning to the prince, who
was rising from his chair.

Gania's voice was full of the most uncontrolled and uncontrollable
irritation.

The prince turned at the door to say something, but perceiving in
Gania's expression that there was but that one drop wanting to make the
cup overflow, he changed his mind and left the room without a word.
A few minutes later he was aware from the noisy voices in the drawing
room, that the conversation had become more quarrelsome than ever after
his departure.

He crossed the salon and the entrance-hall, so as to pass down the
corridor into his own room. As he came near the front door he heard
someone outside vainly endeavouring to ring the bell, which was
evidently broken, and only shook a little, without emitting any sound.

The prince took down the chain and opened the door. He started back in
amazement--for there stood Nastasia Philipovna. He knew her at once from
her photograph. Her eyes blazed with anger as she looked at him. She
quickly pushed by him into the hall, shouldering him out of her way, and
said, furiously, as she threw off her fur cloak:

"If you are too lazy to mend your bell, you should at least wait in
the hall to let people in when they rattle the bell handle. There, now,
you've dropped my fur cloak--dummy!"

Sure enough the cloak was lying on the ground. Nastasia had thrown it
off her towards the prince, expecting him to catch it, but the prince
had missed it.

"Now then--announce me, quick!"

The prince wanted to say something, but was so confused and astonished
that he could not. However, he moved off towards the drawing-room with
the cloak over his arm.

"Now then, where are you taking my cloak to? Ha, ha, ha! Are you mad?"

The prince turned and came back, more confused than ever. When she burst
out laughing, he smiled, but his tongue could not form a word as yet. At
first, when he had opened the door and saw her standing before him, he
had become as pale as death; but now the red blood had rushed back to
his cheeks in a torrent.

"Why, what an idiot it is!" cried Nastasia, stamping her foot with
irritation. "Go on, do! Whom are you going to announce?"

"Nastasia Philipovna," murmured the prince.

"And how do you know that?" she asked him, sharply.

"I have never seen you before!"

"Go on, announce me--what's that noise?"

"They are quarrelling," said the prince, and entered the drawing-room,
just as matters in there had almost reached a crisis. Nina Alexandrovna
had forgotten that she had "submitted to everything!" She was defending
Varia. Ptitsin was taking her part, too. Not that Varia was afraid of
standing up for herself. She was by no means that sort of a girl; but
her brother was becoming ruder and more intolerable every moment. Her
usual practice in such cases as the present was to say nothing, but
stare at him, without taking her eyes off his face for an instant. This
manoeuvre, as she well knew, could drive Gania distracted.

Just at this moment the door opened and the prince entered, announcing:

"Nastasia Philipovna!"

IX.

Silence immediately fell on the room; all looked at the prince as though
they neither understood, nor hoped to understand. Gania was motionless
with horror.

Nastasia's arrival was a most unexpected and overwhelming event to all
parties. In the first place, she had never been before. Up to now she
had been so haughty that she had never even asked Gania to introduce her
to his parents. Of late she had not so much as mentioned them. Gania was
partly glad of this; but still he had put it to her debit in the account
to be settled after marriage.

He would have borne anything from her rather than this visit. But one
thing seemed to him quite clear-her visit now, and the present of her
portrait on this particular day, pointed out plainly enough which way
she intended to make her decision!

The incredulous amazement with which all regarded the prince did not
last long, for Nastasia herself appeared at the door and passed in,
pushing by the prince again.

"At last I've stormed the citadel! Why do you tie up your bell?" she
said, merrily, as she pressed Gania's hand, the latter having rushed
up to her as soon as she made her appearance. "What are you looking so
upset about? Introduce me, please!"

The bewildered Gania introduced her first to Varia, and both women,
before shaking hands, exchanged looks of strange import. Nastasia,
however, smiled amiably; but Varia did not try to look amiable, and kept
her gloomy expression. She did not even vouchsafe the usual courteous
smile of etiquette. Gania darted a terrible glance of wrath at her
for this, but Nina Alexandrovna, mended matters a little when Gania
introduced her at last. Hardly, however, had the old lady begun about
her "highly gratified feelings," and so on, when Nastasia left her, and
flounced into a chair by Gania's side in the corner by the window, and
cried: "Where's your study? and where are the--the lodgers? You do take
in lodgers, don't you?"

Gania looked dreadfully put out, and tried to say something in reply,
but Nastasia interrupted him:

"Why, where are you going to squeeze lodgers in here? Don't you use
a study? Does this sort of thing pay?" she added, turning to Nina
Alexandrovna.

"Well, it is troublesome, rather," said the latter; "but I suppose it
will 'pay' pretty well. We have only just begun, however--"

Again Nastasia Philipovna did not hear the sentence out. She glanced at
Gania, and cried, laughing, "What a face! My goodness, what a face you
have on at this moment!"

Indeed, Gania did not look in the least like himself. His bewilderment
and his alarmed perplexity passed off, however, and his lips now
twitched with rage as he continued to stare evilly at his laughing
guest, while his countenance became absolutely livid.

There was another witness, who, though standing at the door motionless
and bewildered himself, still managed to remark Gania's death-like
pallor, and the dreadful change that had come over his face. This
witness was the prince, who now advanced in alarm and muttered to Gania:

"Drink some water, and don't look like that!"

It was clear that he came out with these words quite spontaneously, on
the spur of the moment. But his speech was productive of much--for
it appeared that all. Gania's rage now overflowed upon the prince. He
seized him by the shoulder and gazed with an intensity of loathing and
revenge at him, but said nothing--as though his feelings were too strong
to permit of words.

General agitation prevailed. Nina Alexandrovna gave a little cry of
anxiety; Ptitsin took a step forward in alarm; Colia and Ferdishenko
stood stock still at the door in amazement;--only Varia remained coolly
watching the scene from under her eyelashes. She did not sit down,
but stood by her mother with folded hands. However, Gania recollected
himself almost immediately. He let go of the prince and burst out
laughing.

"Why, are you a doctor, prince, or what?" he asked, as naturally as
possible. "I declare you quite frightened me! Nastasia Philipovna, let
me introduce this interesting character to you--though I have only known
him myself since the morning."

Nastasia gazed at the prince in bewilderment. "Prince? He a Prince? Why,
I took him for the footman, just now, and sent him in to announce me!
Ha, ha, ha, isn't that good!"

"Not bad that, not bad at all!" put in Ferdishenko, "se non e vero--"

"I rather think I pitched into you, too, didn't I? Forgive me--do! Who
is he, did you say? What prince? Muishkin?" she added, addressing Gania.

"He is a lodger of ours," explained the latter.

"An idiot!"--the prince distinctly heard the word half whispered from
behind him. This was Ferdishenko's voluntary information for Nastasia's
benefit.

"Tell me, why didn't you put me right when I made such a dreadful
mistake just now?" continued the latter, examining the prince from head
to foot without the slightest ceremony. She awaited the answer as though
convinced that it would be so foolish that she must inevitably fail to
restrain her laughter over it.

"I was astonished, seeing you so suddenly--" murmured the prince.

"How did you know who I was? Where had you seen me before? And why were
you so struck dumb at the sight of me? What was there so overwhelming
about me?"

"Oho! ho, ho, ho!" cried Ferdishenko. "NOW then, prince! My word,
what things I would say if I had such a chance as that! My goodness,
prince--go on!"

"So should I, in your place, I've no doubt!" laughed the prince to
Ferdishenko; then continued, addressing Nastasia: "Your portrait struck
me very forcibly this morning; then I was talking about you to the
Epanchins; and then, in the train, before I reached Petersburg, Parfen
Rogojin told me a good deal about you; and at the very moment that I
opened the door to you I happened to be thinking of you, when--there you
stood before me!"

"And how did you recognize me?"

"From the portrait!"

"What else?"

"I seemed to imagine you exactly as you are--I seemed to have seen you
somewhere."

"Where--where?"

"I seem to have seen your eyes somewhere; but it cannot be! I have not
seen you--I never was here before. I may have dreamed of you, I don't
know."

The prince said all this with manifest effort--in broken sentences, and
with many drawings of breath. He was evidently much agitated. Nastasia
Philipovna looked at him inquisitively, but did not laugh.

"Bravo, prince!" cried Ferdishenko, delighted.

At this moment a loud voice from behind the group which hedged in the
prince and Nastasia Philipovna, divided the crowd, as it were, and
before them stood the head of the family, General Ivolgin. He was
dressed in evening clothes; his moustache was dyed.

This apparition was too much for Gania. Vain and ambitious almost to
morbidness, he had had much to put up with in the last two months, and
was seeking feverishly for some means of enabling himself to lead a more
presentable kind of existence. At home, he now adopted an attitude
of absolute cynicism, but he could not keep this up before Nastasia
Philipovna, although he had sworn to make her pay after marriage for all
he suffered now. He was experiencing a last humiliation, the bitterest
of all, at this moment--the humiliation of blushing for his own kindred
in his own house. A question flashed through his mind as to whether the
game was really worth the candle.

For that had happened at this moment, which for two months had been his
nightmare; which had filled his soul with dread and shame--the meeting
between his father and Nastasia Philipovna. He had often tried to
imagine such an event, but had found the picture too mortifying and
exasperating, and had quietly dropped it. Very likely he anticipated
far worse things than was at all necessary; it is often so with vain
persons. He had long since determined, therefore, to get his father
out of the way, anywhere, before his marriage, in order to avoid such
a meeting; but when Nastasia entered the room just now, he had been so
overwhelmed with astonishment, that he had not thought of his father,
and had made no arrangements to keep him out of the way. And now it was
too late--there he was, and got up, too, in a dress coat and white tie,
and Nastasia in the very humour to heap ridicule on him and his family
circle; of this last fact, he felt quite persuaded. What else had she
come for? There were his mother and his sister sitting before her, and
she seemed to have forgotten their very existence already; and if she
behaved like that, he thought, she must have some object in view.

Ferdishenko led the general up to Nastasia Philipovna.

"Ardalion Alexandrovitch Ivolgin," said the smiling general, with a low
bow of great dignity, "an old soldier, unfortunate, and the father
of this family; but happy in the hope of including in that family so
exquisite--"

He did not finish his sentence, for at this moment Ferdishenko pushed
a chair up from behind, and the general, not very firm on his legs,
at this post-prandial hour, flopped into it backwards. It was always a
difficult thing to put this warrior to confusion, and his sudden
descent left him as composed as before. He had sat down just opposite to
Nastasia, whose fingers he now took, and raised to his lips with great
elegance, and much courtesy. The general had once belonged to a very
select circle of society, but he had been turned out of it two or three
years since on account of certain weaknesses, in which he now indulged
with all the less restraint; but his good manners remained with him to
this day, in spite of all.

Nastasia Philipovna seemed delighted at the appearance of this latest
arrival, of whom she had of course heard a good deal by report.

"I have heard that my son--" began Ardalion Alexandrovitch.

"Your son, indeed! A nice papa you are! YOU might have come to see me
anyhow, without compromising anyone. Do you hide yourself, or does your
son hide you?"

"The children of the nineteenth century, and their parents--" began the
general, again.

"Nastasia Philipovna, will you excuse the general for a moment?
Someone is inquiring for him," said Nina Alexandrovna in a loud voice,
interrupting the conversation.

"Excuse him? Oh no, I have wished to see him too long for that. Why,
what business can he have? He has retired, hasn't he? You won't leave
me, general, will you?"

"I give you my word that he shall come and see you--but he--he needs
rest just now."

"General, they say you require rest," said Nastasia Philipovna, with the
melancholy face of a child whose toy is taken away.

Ardalion Alexandrovitch immediately did his best to make his foolish
position a great deal worse.

"My dear, my dear!" he said, solemnly and reproachfully, looking at his
wife, with one hand on his heart.

"Won't you leave the room, mamma?" asked Varia, aloud.

"No, Varia, I shall sit it out to the end."

Nastasia must have overheard both question and reply, but her vivacity
was not in the least damped. On the contrary, it seemed to increase. She
immediately overwhelmed the general once more with questions, and within
five minutes that gentleman was as happy as a king, and holding forth at
the top of his voice, amid the laughter of almost all who heard him.

Colia jogged the prince's arm.

"Can't YOU get him out of the room, somehow? DO, please," and tears
of annoyance stood in the boy's eyes. "Curse that Gania!" he muttered,
between his teeth.

"Oh yes, I knew General Epanchin well," General Ivolgin was saying at
this moment; "he and Prince Nicolai Ivanovitch Muishkin--whose son I
have this day embraced after an absence of twenty years--and I,
were three inseparables. Alas one is in the grave, torn to pieces by
calumnies and bullets; another is now before you, still battling with
calumnies and bullets--"

"Bullets?" cried Nastasia.

"Yes, here in my chest. I received them at the siege of Kars, and I feel
them in bad weather now. And as to the third of our trio, Epanchin, of
course after that little affair with the poodle in the railway carriage,
it was all UP between us."

"Poodle? What was that? And in a railway carriage? Dear me," said
Nastasia, thoughtfully, as though trying to recall something to mind.

"Oh, just a silly, little occurrence, really not worth telling, about
Princess Bielokonski's governess, Miss Smith, and--oh, it is really not
worth telling!"

"No, no, we must have it!" cried Nastasia merrily.

"Yes, of course," said Ferdishenko. "C'est du nouveau."

"Ardalion," said Nina Alexandrovitch, entreatingly.

"Papa, you are wanted!" cried Colia.

"Well, it is a silly little story, in a few words," began the delighted
general. "A couple of years ago, soon after the new railway was opened,
I had to go somewhere or other on business. Well, I took a first-class
ticket, sat down, and began to smoke, or rather CONTINUED to smoke, for
I had lighted up before. I was alone in the carriage. Smoking is not
allowed, but is not prohibited either; it is half allowed--so to speak,
winked at. I had the window open."

"Suddenly, just before the whistle, in came two ladies with a little
poodle, and sat down opposite to me; not bad-looking women; one was in
light blue, the other in black silk. The poodle, a beauty with a silver
collar, lay on light blue's knee. They looked haughtily about, and
talked English together. I took no notice, just went on smoking. I
observed that the ladies were getting angry--over my cigar, doubtless.
One looked at me through her tortoise-shell eyeglass.

"I took no notice, because they never said a word. If they didn't like
the cigar, why couldn't they say so? Not a word, not a hint! Suddenly,
and without the very slightest suspicion of warning, 'light blue' seizes
my cigar from between my fingers, and, wheugh! out of the window with
it! Well, on flew the train, and I sat bewildered, and the young woman,
tall and fair, and rather red in the face, too red, glared at me with
flashing eyes.

"I didn't say a word, but with extreme courtesy, I may say with most
refined courtesy, I reached my finger and thumb over towards the poodle,
took it up delicately by the nape of the neck, and chucked it out of
the window, after the cigar. The train went flying on, and the poodle's
yells were lost in the distance."

"Oh, you naughty man!" cried Nastasia, laughing and clapping her hands
like a child.

"Bravo!" said Ferdishenko. Ptitsin laughed too, though he had been very
sorry to see the general appear. Even Colia laughed and said, "Bravo!"

"And I was right, truly right," cried the general, with warmth and
solemnity, "for if cigars are forbidden in railway carriages, poodles
are much more so."

"Well, and what did the lady do?" asked Nastasia, impatiently.

"She--ah, that's where all the mischief of it lies!" replied Ivolgin,
frowning. "Without a word, as it were, of warning, she slapped me on the
cheek! An extraordinary woman!"

"And you?"

The general dropped his eyes, and elevated his brows; shrugged his
shoulders, tightened his lips, spread his hands, and remained silent. At
last he blurted out:

"I lost my head!"

"Did you hit her?"

"No, oh no!--there was a great flare-up, but I didn't hit her! I had to
struggle a little, purely to defend myself; but the very devil was
in the business. It turned out that 'light blue' was an Englishwoman,
governess or something, at Princess Bielokonski's, and the other woman
was one of the old-maid princesses Bielokonski. Well, everybody knows
what great friends the princess and Mrs. Epanchin are, so there was a
pretty kettle of fish. All the Bielokonskis went into mourning for the
poodle. Six princesses in tears, and the Englishwoman shrieking!

"Of course I wrote an apology, and called, but they would not receive
either me or my apology, and the Epanchins cut me, too!"

"But wait," said Nastasia. "How is it that, five or six days since,
I read exactly the same story in the paper, as happening between a
Frenchman and an English girl? The cigar was snatched away exactly as
you describe, and the poodle was chucked out of the window after it. The
slapping came off, too, as in your case; and the girl's dress was light
blue!"

The general blushed dreadfully; Colia blushed too; and Ptitsin turned
hastily away. Ferdishenko was the only one who laughed as gaily as
before. As to Gania, I need not say that he was miserable; he stood dumb
and wretched and took no notice of anybody.

"I assure you," said the general, "that exactly the same thing happened
to myself!"

"I remembered there was some quarrel between father and Miss Smith, the
Bielokonski's governess," said Colia.

"How very curious, point for point the same anecdote, and happening at
different ends of Europe! Even the light blue dress the same," continued
the pitiless Nastasia. "I must really send you the paper."

"You must observe," insisted the general, "that my experience was two
years earlier."

"Ah! that's it, no doubt!"

Nastasia Philipovna laughed hysterically.

"Father, will you hear a word from me outside!" said Gania, his voice
shaking with agitation, as he seized his father by the shoulder. His
eyes shone with a blaze of hatred.

At this moment there was a terrific bang at the front door, almost
enough to break it down. Some most unusual visitor must have arrived.
Colia ran to open.

X.

THE entrance-hall suddenly became full of noise and people. To judge
from the sounds which penetrated to the drawing-room, a number of people
had already come in, and the stampede continued. Several voices were
talking and shouting at once; others were talking and shouting on the
stairs outside; it was evidently a most extraordinary visit that was
about to take place.

Everyone exchanged startled glances. Gania rushed out towards the
dining-room, but a number of men had already made their way in, and met
him.

"Ah! here he is, the Judas!" cried a voice which the prince recognized
at once. "How d'ye do, Gania, you old blackguard?"

"Yes, that's the man!" said another voice.

There was no room for doubt in the prince's mind: one of the voices was
Rogojin's, and the other Lebedeff's.

Gania stood at the door like a block and looked on in silence, putting
no obstacle in the way of their entrance, and ten or a dozen men
marched in behind Parfen Rogojin. They were a decidedly mixed-looking
collection, and some of them came in in their furs and caps. None of
them were quite drunk, but all appeared to De considerably excited.

They seemed to need each other's support, morally, before they dared
come in; not one of them would have entered alone but with the rest each
one was brave enough. Even Rogojin entered rather cautiously at the head
of his troop; but he was evidently preoccupied. He appeared to be gloomy
and morose, and had clearly come with some end in view. All the rest
were merely chorus, brought in to support the chief character. Besides
Lebedeff there was the dandy Zalesheff, who came in without his coat
and hat, two or three others followed his example; the rest were
more uncouth. They included a couple of young merchants, a man in
a great-coat, a medical student, a little Pole, a small fat man who
laughed continuously, and an enormously tall stout one who apparently
put great faith in the strength of his fists. A couple of "ladies" of
some sort put their heads in at the front door, but did not dare come
any farther. Colia promptly banged the door in their faces and locked
it.

"Hallo, Gania, you blackguard! You didn't expect Rogojin, eh?" said the
latter, entering the drawing-room, and stopping before Gania.

But at this moment he saw, seated before him, Nastasia Philipovna.
He had not dreamed of meeting her here, evidently, for her appearance
produced a marvellous effect upon him. He grew pale, and his lips became
actually blue.

"I suppose it is true, then!" he muttered to himself, and his face took
on an expression of despair. "So that's the end of it! Now you, sir,
will you answer me or not?" he went on suddenly, gazing at Gania with
ineffable malice. "Now then, you--"

He panted, and could hardly speak for agitation. He advanced into the
room mechanically; but perceiving Nina Alexandrovna and Varia he became
more or less embarrassed, in spite of his excitement. His followers
entered after him, and all paused a moment at sight of the ladies. Of
course their modesty was not fated to be long-lived, but for a moment
they were abashed. Once let them begin to shout, however, and nothing on
earth should disconcert them.

"What, you here too, prince?" said Rogojin, absently, but a little
surprised all the same "Still in your gaiters, eh?" He sighed, and
forgot the prince next moment, and his wild eyes wandered over to
Nastasia again, as though attracted in that direction by some magnetic
force.

Nastasia looked at the new arrivals with great curiosity. Gania
recollected himself at last.

"Excuse me, sirs," he said, loudly, "but what does all this mean?"
He glared at the advancing crowd generally, but addressed his remarks
especially to their captain, Rogojin. "You are not in a stable,
gentlemen, though you may think it--my mother and sister are present."

"Yes, I see your mother and sister," muttered Rogojin, through his
teeth; and Lebedeff seemed to feel himself called upon to second the
statement.

"At all events, I must request you to step into the salon," said Gania,
his rage rising quite out of proportion to his words, "and then I shall
inquire--"

"What, he doesn't know me!" said Rogojin, showing his teeth
disagreeably. "He doesn't recognize Rogojin!" He did not move an inch,
however.

"I have met you somewhere, I believe, but--"

"Met me somewhere, pfu! Why, it's only three months since I lost two
hundred roubles of my father's money to you, at cards. The old fellow
died before he found out. Ptitsin knows all about it. Why, I've only to
pull out a three-rouble note and show it to you, and you'd crawl on your
hands and knees to the other end of the town for it; that's the sort of
man you are. Why, I've come now, at this moment, to buy you up! Oh, you
needn't think that because I wear these boots I have no money. I have
lots of money, my beauty,--enough to buy up you and all yours together.
So I shall, if I like to! I'll buy you up! I will!" he yelled,
apparently growing more and more intoxicated and excited. "Oh, Nastasia
Philipovna! don't turn me out! Say one word, do! Are you going to marry
this man, or not?"

Rogojin asked his question like a lost soul appealing to some divinity,
with the reckless daring of one appointed to die, who has nothing to
lose.

He awaited the reply in deadly anxiety.

Nastasia Philipovna gazed at him with a haughty, ironical expression of
face; but when she glanced at Nina Alexandrovna and Varia, and from them
to Gania, she changed her tone, all of a sudden.

"Certainly not; what are you thinking of? What could have induced you
to ask such a question?" she replied, quietly and seriously, and even,
apparently, with some astonishment.

"No? No?" shouted Rogojin, almost out of his mind with joy. "You are
not going to, after all? And they told me--oh, Nastasia Philipovna--they
said you had promised to marry him, HIM! As if you COULD do
it!--him--pooh! I don't mind saying it to everyone--I'd buy him off
for a hundred roubles, any day pfu! Give him a thousand, or three if he
likes, poor devil' and he'd cut and run the day before his wedding, and
leave his bride to me! Wouldn't you, Gania, you blackguard? You'd take
three thousand, wouldn't you? Here's the money! Look, I've come on
purpose to pay you off and get your receipt, formally. I said I'd buy
you up, and so I will."

"Get out of this, you drunken beast!" cried Gania, who was red and white
by turns.

Rogojin's troop, who were only waiting for an excuse, set up a howl at
this. Lebedeff stepped forward and whispered something in Parfen's ear.

"You're right, clerk," said the latter, "you're right, tipsy
spirit--you're right!--Nastasia Philipovna," he added, looking at her
like some lunatic, harmless generally, but suddenly wound up to a pitch
of audacity, "here are eighteen thousand roubles, and--and you shall
have more--." Here he threw a packet of bank-notes tied up in white
paper, on the table before her, not daring to say all he wished to say.

"No-no-no!" muttered Lebedeff, clutching at his arm. He was clearly
aghast at the largeness of the sum, and thought a far smaller amount
should have been tried first.

"No, you fool--you don't know whom you are dealing with--and it appears
I am a fool, too!" said Parfen, trembling beneath the flashing glance
of Nastasia. "Oh, curse it all! What a fool I was to listen to you!" he
added, with profound melancholy.

Nastasia Philipovna, observing his woe-begone expression, suddenly burst
out laughing.

"Eighteen thousand roubles, for me? Why, you declare yourself a fool at
once," she said, with impudent familiarity, as she rose from the sofa
and prepared to go. Gania watched the whole scene with a sinking of the
heart.

"Forty thousand, then--forty thousand roubles instead of eighteen!
Ptitsin and another have promised to find me forty thousand roubles by
seven o'clock tonight. Forty thousand roubles--paid down on the nail!"

The scene was growing more and more disgraceful; but Nastasia Philipovna
continued to laugh and did not go away. Nina Alexandrovna and Varia had
both risen from their places and were waiting, in silent horror, to
see what would happen. Varia's eyes were all ablaze with anger; but
the scene had a different effect on Nina Alexandrovna. She paled and
trembled, and looked more and more like fainting every moment.

"Very well then, a HUNDRED thousand! a hundred thousand! paid this
very day. Ptitsin! find it for me. A good share shall stick to your
fingers--come!"

"You are mad!" said Ptitsin, coming up quickly and seizing him by the
hand. "You're drunk--the police will be sent for if you don't look out.
Think where you are."

"Yes, he's boasting like a drunkard," added Nastasia, as though with the
sole intention of goading him.

"I do NOT boast! You shall have a hundred thousand, this very day.
Ptitsin, get the money, you gay usurer! Take what you like for it, but
get it by the evening! I'll show that I'm in earnest!" cried Rogojin,
working himself up into a frenzy of excitement.

"Come, come; what's all this?" cried General Ivolgin, suddenly and
angrily, coming close up to Rogojin. The unexpectedness of this sally on
the part of the hitherto silent old man caused some laughter among the
intruders.

"Halloa! what's this now?" laughed Rogojin. "You come along with me, old
fellow! You shall have as much to drink as you like."

"Oh, it's too horrible!" cried poor Colia, sobbing with shame and
annoyance.

"Surely there must be someone among all of you here who will turn this
shameless creature out of the room?" cried Varia, suddenly. She was
shaking and trembling with rage.

"That's me, I suppose. I'm the shameless creature!" cried Nastasia
Philipovna, with amused indifference. "Dear me, and I came--like a fool,
as I am--to invite them over to my house for the evening! Look how your
sister treats me, Gavrila Ardalionovitch."

For some moments Gania stood as if stunned or struck by lightning, after
his sister's speech. But seeing that Nastasia Philipovna was really
about to leave the room this time, he sprang at Varia and seized her by
the arm like a madman.

"What have you done?" he hissed, glaring at her as though he would like
to annihilate her on the spot. He was quite beside himself, and could
hardly articulate his words for rage.

"What have I done? Where are you dragging me to?"

"Do you wish me to beg pardon of this creature because she has come here
to insult our mother and disgrace the whole household, you low, base
wretch?" cried Varia, looking back at her brother with proud defiance.

A few moments passed as they stood there face to face, Gania still
holding her wrist tightly. Varia struggled once--twice--to get free;
then could restrain herself no longer, and spat in his face.

"There's a girl for you!" cried Nastasia Philipovna. "Mr. Ptitsin, I
congratulate you on your choice."

Gania lost his head. Forgetful of everything he aimed a blow at Varia,
which would inevitably have laid her low, but suddenly another hand
caught his. Between him and Varia stood the prince.

"Enough--enough!" said the latter, with insistence, but all of a tremble
with excitement.

"Are you going to cross my path for ever, damn you!" cried Gania; and,
loosening his hold on Varia, he slapped the prince's face with all his
force.

Exclamations of horror arose on all sides. The prince grew pale as
death; he gazed into Gania's eyes with a strange, wild, reproachful
look; his lips trembled and vainly endeavoured to form some words; then
his mouth twisted into an incongruous smile.

"Very well--never mind about me; but I shall not allow you to strike
her!" he said, at last, quietly. Then, suddenly, he could bear it no
longer, and covering his face with his hands, turned to the wall, and
murmured in broken accents:

"Oh! how ashamed you will be of this afterwards!"

Gania certainly did look dreadfully abashed. Colia rushed up to comfort
the prince, and after him crowded Varia, Rogojin and all, even the
general.

"It's nothing, it's nothing!" said the prince, and again he wore the
smile which was so inconsistent with the circumstances.

"Yes, he will be ashamed!" cried Rogojin. "You will be properly ashamed
of yourself for having injured such a--such a sheep" (he could not find
a better word). "Prince, my dear fellow, leave this and come away with
me. I'll show you how Rogojin shows his affection for his friends."

Nastasia Philipovna was also much impressed, both with Gania's action
and with the prince's reply.

Her usually thoughtful, pale face, which all this while had been so
little in harmony with the jests and laughter which she had seemed to
put on for the occasion, was now evidently agitated by new feelings,
though she tried to conceal the fact and to look as though she were as
ready as ever for jesting and irony.

"I really think I must have seen him somewhere!" she murmured seriously
enough.

"Oh, aren't you ashamed of yourself--aren't you ashamed? Are you really
the sort of woman you are trying to represent yourself to be? Is
it possible?" The prince was now addressing Nastasia, in a tone of
reproach, which evidently came from his very heart.

Nastasia Philipovna looked surprised, and smiled, but evidently
concealed something beneath her smile and with some confusion and a
glance at Gania she left the room.

However, she had not reached the outer hall when she turned round,
walked quickly up to Nina Alexandrovna, seized her hand and lifted it to
her lips.

"He guessed quite right. I am not that sort of woman," she whispered
hurriedly, flushing red all over. Then she turned again and left the
room so quickly that no one could imagine what she had come back for.
All they saw was that she said something to Nina Alexandrovna in a
hurried whisper, and seemed to kiss her hand. Varia, however, both saw
and heard all, and watched Nastasia out of the room with an expression
of wonder.

Gania recollected himself in time to rush after her in order to show her
out, but she had gone. He followed her to the stairs.

"Don't come with me," she cried, "Au revoir, till the evening--do you
hear? Au revoir!"

He returned thoughtful and confused; the riddle lay heavier than ever on
his soul. He was troubled about the prince, too, and so bewildered that
he did not even observe Rogojin's rowdy band crowd past him and step on
his toes, at the door as they went out. They were all talking at once.
Rogojin went ahead of the others, talking to Ptitsin, and apparently
insisting vehemently upon something very important.

"You've lost the game, Gania" he cried, as he passed the latter.

Gania gazed after him uneasily, but said nothing.

XI.

THE prince now left the room and shut himself up in his own chamber.
Colia followed him almost at once, anxious to do what he could to
console him. The poor boy seemed to be already so attached to him that
he could hardly leave him.

"You were quite right to go away!" he said. "The row will rage there
worse than ever now; and it's like this every day with us--and all
through that Nastasia Philipovna."

"You have so many sources of trouble here, Colia," said the prince.

"Yes, indeed, and it is all our own fault. But I have a great friend who
is much worse off even than we are. Would you like to know him?"

"Yes, very much. Is he one of your school-fellows?"

"Well, not exactly. I will tell you all about him some day.... What do
you think of Nastasia Philipovna? She is beautiful, isn't she? I
had never seen her before, though I had a great wish to do so. She
fascinated me. I could forgive Gania if he were to marry her for love,
but for money! Oh dear! that is horrible!"

"Yes, your brother does not attract me much."

"I am not surprised at that. After what you... But I do hate that way
of looking at things! Because some fool, or a rogue pretending to be a
fool, strikes a man, that man is to be dishonoured for his whole life,
unless he wipes out the disgrace with blood, or makes his assailant beg
forgiveness on his knees! I think that so very absurd and tyrannical.
Lermontoff's Bal Masque is based on that idea--a stupid and unnatural
one, in my opinion; but he was hardly more than a child when he wrote
it."

"I like your sister very much."

"Did you see how she spat in Gania's face! Varia is afraid of no one.
But you did not follow her example, and yet I am sure it was not through
cowardice. Here she comes! Speak of a wolf and you see his tail! I felt
sure that she would come. She is very generous, though of course she has
her faults."

Varia pounced upon her brother.

"This is not the place for you," said she. "Go to father. Is he plaguing
you, prince?"

"Not in the least; on the contrary, he interests me."

"Scolding as usual, Varia! It is the worst thing about her. After all,
I believe father may have started off with Rogojin. No doubt he is sorry
now. Perhaps I had better go and see what he is doing," added Colia,
running off.

"Thank God, I have got mother away, and put her to bed without another
scene! Gania is worried--and ashamed--not without reason! What a
spectacle! I have come to thank you once more, prince, and to ask you if
you knew Nastasia Philipovna before?"

"No, I have never known her."

"Then what did you mean, when you said straight out to her that she was
not really 'like that'? You guessed right, I fancy. It is quite possible
she was not herself at the moment, though I cannot fathom her meaning.
Evidently she meant to hurt and insult us. I have heard curious tales
about her before now, but if she came to invite us to her house, why
did she behave so to my mother? Ptitsin knows her very well; he says he
could not understand her today. With Rogojin, too! No one with a spark
of self-respect could have talked like that in the house of her...
Mother is extremely vexed on your account, too...

"That is nothing!" said the prince, waving his hand.

"But how meek she was when you spoke to her!"

"Meek! What do you mean?"

"You told her it was a shame for her to behave so, and her manner
changed at once; she was like another person. You have some influence
over her, prince," added Varia, smiling a little.

The door opened at this point, and in came Gania most unexpectedly.

He was not in the least disconcerted to see Varia there, but he stood a
moment at the door, and then approached the prince quietly.

"Prince," he said, with feeling, "I was a blackguard. Forgive me!" His
face gave evidence of suffering. The prince was considerably amazed,
and did not reply at once. "Oh, come, forgive me, forgive me!" Gania
insisted, rather impatiently. "If you like, I'll kiss your hand. There!"

The prince was touched; he took Gania's hands, and embraced him
heartily, while each kissed the other.

"I never, never thought you were like that," said Muishkin, drawing a
deep breath. "I thought you--you weren't capable of--"

"Of what? Apologizing, eh? And where on earth did I get the idea
that you were an idiot? You always observe what other people pass by
unnoticed; one could talk sense to you, but--"

"Here is another to whom you should apologize," said the prince,
pointing to Varia.

"No, no! they are all enemies! I've tried them often enough, believe
me," and Gania turned his back on Varia with these words.

"But if I beg you to make it up?" said Varia.

"And you'll go to Nastasia Philipovna's this evening--"

"If you insist: but, judge for yourself, can I go, ought I to go?"

"But she is not that sort of woman, I tell you!" said Gania, angrily.
"She was only acting."

"I know that--I know that; but what a part to play! And think what she
must take YOU for, Gania! I know she kissed mother's hand, and all that,
but she laughed at you, all the same. All this is not good enough
for seventy-five thousand roubles, my dear boy. You are capable of
honourable feelings still, and that's why I am talking to you so. Oh! DO
take care what you are doing! Don't you know yourself that it will end
badly, Gania?"

So saying, and in a state of violent agitation, Varia left the room.

"There, they are all like that," said Gania, laughing, "just as if I do
not know all about it much better than they do."

He sat down with these words, evidently intending to prolong his visit.

"If you know it so well," said the prince a little timidly, "why do you
choose all this worry for the sake of the seventy-five thousand, which,
you confess, does not cover it?"

"I didn't mean that," said Gania; "but while we are upon the subject,
let me hear your opinion. Is all this worry worth seventy-five thousand
or not?

"Certainly not."

"Of course! And it would be a disgrace to marry so, eh?"

"A great disgrace."

"Oh, well, then you may know that I shall certainly do it, now. I shall
certainly marry her. I was not quite sure of myself before, but now I
am. Don't say a word: I know what you want to tell me--"

"No. I was only going to say that what surprises me most of all is your
extraordinary confidence."

"How so? What in?"

"That Nastasia Philipovna will accept you, and that the question is as
good as settled; and secondly, that even if she did, you would be able
to pocket the money. Of course, I know very little about it, but that's
my view. When a man marries for money it often happens that the wife
keeps the money in her own hands."

"Of course, you don't know all; but, I assure you, you needn't be
afraid, it won't be like that in our case. There are circumstances,"
said Gania, rather excitedly. "And as to her answer to me, there's no
doubt about that. Why should you suppose she will refuse me?"

"Oh, I only judge by what I see. Varvara Ardalionovna said just now--"

"Oh she--they don't know anything about it! Nastasia was only chaffing
Rogojin. I was alarmed at first, but I have thought better of it now;
she was simply laughing at him. She looks on me as a fool because I show
that I meant her money, and doesn't realize that there are other men
who would deceive her in far worse fashion. I'm not going to pretend
anything, and you'll see she'll marry me, all right. If she likes to
live quietly, so she shall; but if she gives me any of her nonsense, I
shall leave her at once, but I shall keep the money. I'm not going to
look a fool; that's the first thing, not to look a fool."

"But Nastasia Philipovna seems to me to be such a SENSIBLE woman, and,
as such, why should she run blindly into this business? That's what
puzzles me so," said the prince.

"You don't know all, you see; I tell you there are things--and besides,
I'm sure that she is persuaded that I love her to distraction, and I
give you my word I have a strong suspicion that she loves me, too--in
her own way, of course. She thinks she will be able to make a sort of
slave of me all my life; but I shall prepare a little surprise for her.
I don't know whether I ought to be confidential with you, prince; but,
I assure you, you are the only decent fellow I have come across. I have
not spoken so sincerely as I am doing at this moment for years. There
are uncommonly few honest people about, prince; there isn't one honester
than Ptitsin, he's the best of the lot. Are you laughing? You don't
know, perhaps, that blackguards like honest people, and being one myself
I like you. WHY am I a blackguard? Tell me honestly, now. They all call
me a blackguard because of her, and I have got into the way of thinking
myself one. That's what is so bad about the business."

"I for one shall never think you a blackguard again," said the prince.
"I confess I had a poor opinion of you at first, but I have been so
joyfully surprised about you just now; it's a good lesson for me. I
shall never judge again without a thorough trial. I see now that you are
riot only not a blackguard, but are not even quite spoiled. I see that
you are quite an ordinary man, not original in the least degree, but
rather weak."

Gania laughed sarcastically, but said nothing. The prince, seeing that
he did not quite like the last remark, blushed, and was silent too.

"Has my father asked you for money?" asked Gania, suddenly.

"No."

"Don't give it to him if he does. Fancy, he was a decent, respectable
man once! He was received in the best society; he was not always the
liar he is now. Of course, wine is at the bottom of it all; but he is a
good deal worse than an innocent liar now. Do you know that he keeps a
mistress? I can't understand how mother is so long-suffering. Did he
tell you the story of the siege of Kars? Or perhaps the one about his
grey horse that talked? He loves, to enlarge on these absurd histories."
And Gania burst into a fit of laughter. Suddenly he turned to the prince
and asked: "Why are you looking at me like that?"

"I am surprised to see you laugh in that way, like a child. You came
to make friends with me again just now, and you said, 'I will kiss your
hand, if you like,' just as a child would have said it. And then, all at
once you are talking of this mad project--of these seventy-five thousand
roubles! It all seems so absurd and impossible."

"Well, what conclusion have you reached?"

"That you are rushing madly into the undertaking, and that you would
do well to think it over again. It is more than possible that Varvara
Ardalionovna is right."

"Ah! now you begin to moralize! I know that I am only a child, very
well," replied Gania impatiently. "That is proved by my having this
conversation with you. It is not for money only, prince, that I am
rushing into this affair," he continued, hardly master of his words,
so closely had his vanity been touched. "If I reckoned on that I should
certainly be deceived, for I am still too weak in mind and character.
I am obeying a passion, an impulse perhaps, because I have but one aim,
one that overmasters all else. You imagine that once I am in possession
of these seventy-five thousand roubles, I shall rush to buy a
carriage... No, I shall go on wearing the old overcoat I have worn for
three years, and I shall give up my club. I shall follow the example of
men who have made their fortunes. When Ptitsin was seventeen he slept
in the street, he sold pen-knives, and began with a copeck; now he has
sixty thousand roubles, but to get them, what has he not done? Well,
I shall be spared such a hard beginning, and shall start with a little
capital. In fifteen years people will say, 'Look, that's Ivolgin, the
king of the Jews!' You say that I have no originality. Now mark this,
prince--there is nothing so offensive to a man of our time and race
than to be told that he is wanting in originality, that he is weak
in character, has no particular talent, and is, in short, an ordinary
person. You have not even done me the honour of looking upon me as a
rogue. Do you know, I could have knocked you down for that just now! You
wounded me more cruelly than Epanchin, who thinks me capable of selling
him my wife! Observe, it was a perfectly gratuitous idea on his part,
seeing there has never been any discussion of it between us! This has
exasperated me, and I am determined to make a fortune! I will do it!
Once I am rich, I shall be a genius, an extremely original man. One of
the vilest and most hateful things connected with money is that it can
buy even talent; and will do so as long as the world lasts. You will say
that this is childish--or romantic. Well, that will be all the better
for me, but the thing shall be done. I will carry it through. He laughs
most, who laughs last. Why does Epanchin insult me? Simply because,
socially, I am a nobody. However, enough for the present. Colia has put
his nose in to tell us dinner is ready, twice. I'm dining out. I shall
come and talk to you now and then; you shall be comfortable enough with
us. They are sure to make you one of the family. I think you and I
will either be great friends or enemies. Look here now, supposing I had
kissed your hand just now, as I offered to do in all sincerity, should I
have hated you for it afterwards?"

"Certainly, but not always. You would not have been able to keep it up,
and would have ended by forgiving me," said the prince, after a pause
for reflection, and with a pleasant smile.

"Oho, how careful one has to be with you, prince! Haven't you put a drop
of poison in that remark now, eh? By the way--ha, ha, ha!--I forgot to
ask, was I right in believing that you were a good deal struck yourself
with Nastasia Philipovna."

"Ye-yes."

"Are you in love with her?"

"N-no."

"And yet you flush up as red as a rosebud! Come--it's all right. I'm not
going to laugh at you. Do you know she is a very virtuous woman? Believe
it or not, as you like. You think she and Totski--not a bit of it, not a
bit of it! Not for ever so long! Au revoir!"

Gania left the room in great good humour. The prince stayed behind, and
meditated alone for a few minutes. At length, Colia popped his head in
once more.

"I don't want any dinner, thanks, Colia. I had too good a lunch at
General Epanchin's."

Colia came into the room and gave the prince a note; it was from the
general and was carefully sealed up. It was clear from Colia's face how
painful it was to him to deliver the missive. The prince read it, rose,
and took his hat.

"It's only a couple of yards," said Colia, blushing.

"He's sitting there over his bottle--and how they can give him credit,
I cannot understand. Don't tell mother I brought you the note, prince;
I have sworn not to do it a thousand times, but I'm always so sorry for
him. Don't stand on ceremony, give him some trifle, and let that end
it."

"Come along, Colia, I want to see your father. I have an idea," said the
prince.

XII.

Colia took the prince to a public-house in the Litaynaya, not far off.
In one of the side rooms there sat at a table--looking like one of the
regular guests of the establishment--Ardalion Alexandrovitch, with a
bottle before him, and a newspaper on his knee. He was waiting for
the prince, and no sooner did the latter appear than he began a long
harangue about something or other; but so far gone was he that the
prince could hardly understand a word.

"I have not got a ten-rouble note," said the prince; "but here is a
twenty-five. Change it and give me back the fifteen, or I shall be left
without a farthing myself."

"Oh, of course, of course; and you quite understand that I--"

"Yes; and I have another request to make, general. Have you ever been at
Nastasia Philipovna's?"

"I? I? Do you mean me? Often, my friend, often! I only pretended I
had not in order to avoid a painful subject. You saw today, you were a
witness, that I did all that a kind, an indulgent father could do. Now
a father of altogether another type shall step into the scene. You shall
see; the old soldier shall lay bare this intrigue, or a shameless woman
will force her way into a respectable and noble family."

"Yes, quite so. I wished to ask you whether you could show me the way
to Nastasia Philipovna's tonight. I must go; I have business with her; I
was not invited but I was introduced. Anyhow I am ready to trespass the
laws of propriety if only I can get in somehow or other."

"My dear young friend, you have hit on my very idea. It was not for this
rubbish I asked you to come over here" (he pocketed the money, however,
at this point), "it was to invite your alliance in the campaign against
Nastasia Philipovna tonight. How well it sounds, 'General Ivolgin and
Prince Muishkin.' That'll fetch her, I think, eh? Capital! We'll go at
nine; there's time yet."

"Where does she live?"

"Oh, a long way off, near the Great Theatre, just in the square
there--It won't be a large party."

The general sat on and on. He had ordered a fresh bottle when the prince
arrived; this took him an hour to drink, and then he had another, and
another, during the consumption of which he told pretty nearly the whole
story of his life. The prince was in despair. He felt that though he had
but applied to this miserable old drunkard because he saw no other way
of getting to Nastasia Philipovna's, yet he had been very wrong to put
the slightest confidence in such a man.

At last he rose and declared that he would wait no longer. The general
rose too, drank the last drops that he could squeeze out of the bottle,
and staggered into the street.

Muishkin began to despair. He could not imagine how he had been so
foolish as to trust this man. He only wanted one thing, and that was to
get to Nastasia Philipovna's, even at the cost of a certain amount
of impropriety. But now the scandal threatened to be more than he
had bargained for. By this time Ardalion Alexandrovitch was quite
intoxicated, and he kept his companion listening while he discoursed
eloquently and pathetically on subjects of all kinds, interspersed with
torrents of recrimination against the members of his family. He insisted
that all his troubles were caused by their bad conduct, and time alone
would put an end to them.

At last they reached the Litaynaya. The thaw increased steadily, a warm,
unhealthy wind blew through the streets, vehicles splashed through the
mud, and the iron shoes of horses and mules rang on the paving stones.
Crowds of melancholy people plodded wearily along the footpaths, with
here and there a drunken man among them.

"Do you see those brightly-lighted windows?" said the general. "Many of
my old comrades-in-arms live about here, and I, who served longer, and
suffered more than any of them, am walking on foot to the house of
a woman of rather questionable reputation! A man, look you, who has
thirteen bullets on his breast!... You don't believe it? Well, I can
assure you it was entirely on my account that Pirogoff telegraphed
to Paris, and left Sebastopol at the greatest risk during the siege.
Nelaton, the Tuileries surgeon, demanded a safe conduct, in the name
of science, into the besieged city in order to attend my wounds. The
government knows all about it. 'That's the Ivolgin with thirteen bullets
in him!' That's how they speak of me.... Do you see that house, prince?
One of my old friends lives on the first floor, with his large family.
In this and five other houses, three overlooking Nevsky, two in the
Morskaya, are all that remain of my personal friends. Nina Alexandrovna
gave them up long ago, but I keep in touch with them still... I may
say I find refreshment in this little coterie, in thus meeting my old
acquaintances and subordinates, who worship me still, in spite of all.
General Sokolovitch (by the way, I have not called on him lately, or
seen Anna Fedorovna)... You know, my dear prince, when a person does
not receive company himself, he gives up going to other people's houses
involuntarily. And yet... well... you look as if you didn't believe
me.... Well now, why should I not present the son of my old friend
and companion to this delightful family--General Ivolgin and Prince
Muishkin? You will see a lovely girl--what am I saying--a lovely girl?
No, indeed, two, three! Ornaments of this city and of society: beauty,
education, culture--the woman question--poetry--everything! Added to
which is the fact that each one will have a dot of at least eighty
thousand roubles. No bad thing, eh?... In a word I absolutely must
introduce you to them: it is a duty, an obligation. General Ivolgin and
Prince Muishkin. Tableau!"

"At once? Now? You must have forgotten..." began the prince.

"No, I have forgotten nothing. Come! This is the house--up this
magnificent staircase. I am surprised not to see the porter, but .... it
is a holiday... and the man has gone off... Drunken fool! Why have they
not got rid of him? Sokolovitch owes all the happiness he has had in
the service and in his private life to me, and me alone, but... here we
are."

The prince followed quietly, making no further objection for fear of
irritating the old man. At the same time he fervently hoped that General
Sokolovitch and his family would fade away like a mirage in the desert,
so that the visitors could escape, by merely returning downstairs. But
to his horror he saw that General Ivolgin was quite familiar with the
house, and really seemed to have friends there. At every step he named
some topographical or biographical detail that left nothing to be
desired on the score of accuracy. When they arrived at last, on the
first floor, and the general turned to ring the bell to the right,
the prince decided to run away, but a curious incident stopped him
momentarily.

"You have made a mistake, general," said he. "The name on the door is
Koulakoff, and you were going to see General Sokolovitch."

"Koulakoff... Koulakoff means nothing. This is Sokolovitch's flat, and
I am ringing at his door.... What do I care for Koulakoff?... Here comes
someone to open."

In fact, the door opened directly, and the footman in formed the
visitors that the family were all away.

"What a pity! What a pity! It's just my luck!" repeated Ardalion
Alexandrovitch over and over again, in regretful tones. "When your
master and mistress return, my man, tell them that General Ivolgin
and Prince Muishkin desired to present themselves, and that they were
extremely sorry, excessively grieved..."

Just then another person belonging to the household was seen at the
back of the hall. It was a woman of some forty years, dressed in sombre
colours, probably a housekeeper or a governess. Hearing the names she
came forward with a look of suspicion on her face.

"Marie Alexandrovna is not at home," said she, staring hard at the
general. "She has gone to her mother's, with Alexandra Michailovna."

"Alexandra Michailovna out, too! How disappointing! Would you believe
it, I am always so unfortunate! May I most respectfully ask you to
present my compliments to Alexandra Michailovna, and remind her... tell
her, that with my whole heart I wish for her what she wished for herself
on Thursday evening, while she was listening to Chopin's Ballade. She
will remember. I wish it with all sincerity. General Ivolgin and Prince
Muishkin!"

The woman's face changed; she lost her suspicious expression.

"I will not fail to deliver your message," she replied, and bowed them
out.

As they went downstairs the general regretted repeatedly that he had
failed to introduce the prince to his friends.

"You know I am a bit of a poet," said he. "Have you noticed it? The
poetic soul, you know." Then he added suddenly--"But after all...
after all I believe we made a mistake this time! I remember that the
Sokolovitch's live in another house, and what is more, they are just
now in Moscow. Yes, I certainly was at fault. However, it is of no
consequence."

"Just tell me," said the prince in reply, "may I count still on your
assistance? Or shall I go on alone to see Nastasia Philipovna?"

"Count on my assistance? Go alone? How can you ask me that question,
when it is a matter on which the fate of my family so largely depends?
You don't know Ivolgin, my friend. To trust Ivolgin is to trust a rock;
that's how the first squadron I commanded spoke of me. 'Depend upon
Ivolgin,' said they all, 'he is as steady as a rock.' But, excuse me,
I must just call at a house on our way, a house where I have found
consolation and help in all my trials for years."

"You are going home?"

"No... I wish... to visit Madame Terentieff, the widow of Captain
Terentieff, my old subordinate and friend. She helps me to keep up my
courage, and to bear the trials of my domestic life, and as I have an
extra burden on my mind today..."

"It seems to me," interrupted the prince, "that I was foolish to trouble
you just now. However, at present you... Good-bye!"

"Indeed, you must not go away like that, young man, you must not!" cried
the general. "My friend here is a widow, the mother of a family; her
words come straight from her heart, and find an echo in mine. A visit
to her is merely an affair of a few minutes; I am quite at home in her
house. I will have a wash, and dress, and then we can drive to the Grand
Theatre. Make up your mind to spend the evening with me.... We are
just there--that's the house... Why, Colia! you here! Well, is Marfa
Borisovna at home or have you only just come?"

"Oh no! I have been here a long while," replied Colia, who was at the
front door when the general met him. "I am keeping Hippolyte company.
He is worse, and has been in bed all day. I came down to buy some cards.
Marfa Borisovna expects you. But what a state you are in, father!" added
the boy, noticing his father's unsteady gait. "Well, let us go in."

On meeting Colia the prince determined to accompany the general, though
he made up his mind to stay as short a time as possible. He wanted
Colia, but firmly resolved to leave the general behind. He could not
forgive himself for being so simple as to imagine that Ivolgin would be
of any use. The three climbed up the long staircase until they reached
the fourth floor where Madame Terentieff lived.

"You intend to introduce the prince?" asked Colia, as they went up.

"Yes, my boy. I wish to present him: General Ivolgin and Prince
Muishkin! But what's the matter?... what?... How is Marfa Borisovna?"

"You know, father, you would have done much better not to come at all!
She is ready to eat you up! You have not shown yourself since the day
before yesterday and she is expecting the money. Why did you promise her
any? You are always the same! Well, now you will have to get out of it
as best you can."

They stopped before a somewhat low doorway on the fourth floor. Ardalion
Alexandrovitch, evidently much out of countenance, pushed Muishkin in
front.

"I will wait here," he stammered. "I should like to surprise her. ...."

Colia entered first, and as the door stood open, the mistress of the
house peeped out. The surprise of the general's imagination fell very
flat, for she at once began to address him in terms of reproach.

Marfa Borisovna was about forty years of age. She wore a
dressing-jacket, her feet were in slippers, her face painted, and her
hair was in dozens of small plaits. No sooner did she catch sight of
Ardalion Alexandrovitch than she screamed:

"There he is, that wicked, mean wretch! I knew it was he! My heart
misgave me!"

The old man tried to put a good face on the affair.

"Come, let us go in--it's all right," he whispered in the prince's ear.

But it was more serious than he wished to think. As soon as the visitors
had crossed the low dark hall, and entered the narrow reception-room,
furnished with half a dozen cane chairs, and two small card-tables,
Madame Terentieff, in the shrill tones habitual to her, continued her
stream of invectives.

"Are you not ashamed? Are you not ashamed? You barbarian! You tyrant!
You have robbed me of all I possessed--you have sucked my bones to the
marrow. How long shall I be your victim? Shameless, dishonourable man!"

"Marfa Borisovna! Marfa Borisovna! Here is... the Prince Muishkin!
General Ivolgin and Prince Muishkin," stammered the disconcerted old
man.

"Would you believe," said the mistress of the house, suddenly addressing
the prince, "would you believe that that man has not even spared my
orphan children? He has stolen everything I possessed, sold everything,
pawned everything; he has left me nothing--nothing! What am I to do with
your IOU's, you cunning, unscrupulous rogue? Answer, devourer I answer,
heart of stone! How shall I feed my orphans? with what shall I nourish
them? And now he has come, he is drunk! He can scarcely stand. How, oh
how, have I offended the Almighty, that He should bring this curse upon
me! Answer, you worthless villain, answer!"

But this was too much for the general.

"Here are twenty-five roubles, Marfa Borisovna... it is all that I
can give... and I owe even these to the prince's generosity--my noble
friend. I have been cruelly deceived. Such is... life... Now... Excuse
me, I am very weak," he continued, standing in the centre of the
room, and bowing to all sides. "I am faint; excuse me! Lenotchka... a
cushion... my dear!"

Lenotchka, a little girl of eight, ran to fetch the cushion at once, and
placed it on the rickety old sofa. The general meant to have said much
more, but as soon as he had stretched himself out, he turned his face to
the wall, and slept the sleep of the just.

With a grave and ceremonious air, Marfa Borisovna motioned the prince to
a chair at one of the card-tables. She seated herself opposite, leaned
her right cheek on her hand, and sat in silence, her eyes fixed on
Muishkin, now and again sighing deeply. The three children, two little
girls and a boy, Lenotchka being the eldest, came and leant on the
table and also stared steadily at him. Presently Colia appeared from the
adjoining room.

"I am very glad indeed to have met you here, Colia," said the prince.
"Can you do something for me? I must see Nastasia Philipovna, and I
asked Ardalion Alexandrovitch just now to take me to her house, but he
has gone to sleep, as you see. Will you show me the way, for I do not
know the street? I have the address, though; it is close to the Grand
Theatre."

"Nastasia Philipovna? She does not live there, and to tell you the truth
my father has never been to her house! It is strange that you should
have depended on him! She lives near Wladimir Street, at the Five
Corners, and it is quite close by. Will you go directly? It is just
half-past nine. I will show you the way with pleasure."

Colia and the prince went off together. Alas! the latter had no money to
pay for a cab, so they were obliged to walk.

"I should have liked to have taken you to see Hippolyte," said Colia.
"He is the eldest son of the lady you met just now, and was in the next
room. He is ill, and has been in bed all day. But he is rather strange,
and extremely sensitive, and I thought he might be upset considering
the circumstances in which you came... Somehow it touches me less, as
it concerns my father, while it is HIS mother. That, of course, makes
a great difference. What is a terrible disgrace to a woman, does not
disgrace a man, at least not in the same way. Perhaps public opinion
is wrong in condemning one sex, and excusing the other. Hippolyte is
an extremely clever boy, but so prejudiced. He is really a slave to his
opinions."

"Do you say he is consumptive?"

"Yes. It really would be happier for him to die young. If I were in his
place I should certainly long for death. He is unhappy about his brother
and sisters, the children you saw. If it were possible, if we only had a
little money, we should leave our respective families, and live together
in a little apartment of our own. It is our dream. But, do you know,
when I was talking over your affair with him, he was angry, and said
that anyone who did not call out a man who had given him a blow was a
coward. He is very irritable to-day, and I left off arguing the matter
with him. So Nastasia Philipovna has invited you to go and see her?"

"To tell the truth, she has not."

"Then how do you come to be going there?" cried Colia, so much
astonished that he stopped short in the middle of the pavement. "And...
and are you going to her At Home in that costume?"

"I don't know, really, whether I shall be allowed in at all. If she will
receive me, so much the better. If not, the matter is ended. As to my
clothes--what can I do?"

"Are you going there for some particular reason, or only as a way of
getting into her society, and that of her friends?"

"No, I have really an object in going... That is, I am going on business
it is difficult to explain, but..."

"Well, whether you go on business or not is your affair, I do not want
to know. The only important thing, in my eyes, is that you should not
be going there simply for the pleasure of spending your evening in such
company--cocottes, generals, usurers! If that were the case I should
despise and laugh at you. There are terribly few honest people here,
and hardly any whom one can respect, although people put on airs--Varia
especially! Have you noticed, prince, how many adventurers there are
nowadays? Especially here, in our dear Russia. How it has happened I
never can understand. There used to be a certain amount of solidity in
all things, but now what happens? Everything is exposed to the public
gaze, veils are thrown back, every wound is probed by careless fingers.
We are for ever present at an orgy of scandalous revelations. Parents
blush when they remember their old-fashioned morality. At Moscow lately
a father was heard urging his son to stop at nothing--at nothing, mind
you!--to get money! The press seized upon the story, of course, and now
it is public property. Look at my father, the general! See what he is,
and yet, I assure you, he is an honest man! Only... he drinks too much,
and his morals are not all we could desire. Yes, that's true! I pity
him, to tell the truth, but I dare not say so, because everybody would
laugh at me--but I do pity him! And who are the really clever men, after
all? Money-grubbers, every one of them, from the first to the last.
Hippolyte finds excuses for money-lending, and says it is a necessity.
He talks about the economic movement, and the ebb and flow of capital;
the devil knows what he means. It makes me angry to hear him talk so,
but he is soured by his troubles. Just imagine-the general keeps his
mother-but she lends him money! She lends it for a week or ten days
at very high interest! Isn't it disgusting? And then, you would hardly
believe it, but my mother--Nina Alexandrovna--helps Hippolyte in all
sorts of ways, sends him money and clothes. She even goes as far as
helping the children, through Hippolyte, because their mother cares
nothing about them, and Varia does the same."

"Well, just now you said there were no honest nor good people about,
that there were only money-grubbers--and here they are quite close at
hand, these honest and good people, your mother and Varia! I think
there is a good deal of moral strength in helping people in such
circumstances."

"Varia does it from pride, and likes showing off, and giving herself
airs. As to my mother, I really do admire her--yes, and honour her.
Hippolyte, hardened as he is, feels it. He laughed at first, and thought
it vulgar of her--but now, he is sometimes quite touched and overcome by
her kindness. H'm! You call that being strong and good? I will remember
