"Don't you see he is a lunatic, prince?" whispered Evgenie Pavlovitch
in his ear. "Someone told me just now that he is a bit touched on the
subject of lawyers, that he has a mania for making speeches and intends
to pass the examinations. I am expecting a splendid burlesque now."

"My conclusion is vast," replied Lebedeff, in a voice like thunder. "Let
us examine first the psychological and legal position of the criminal.
We see that in spite of the difficulty of finding other food, the
accused, or, as we may say, my client, has often during his peculiar
life exhibited signs of repentance, and of wishing to give up this
clerical diet. Incontrovertible facts prove this assertion. He has eaten
five or six children, a relatively insignificant number, no doubt,
but remarkable enough from another point of view. It is manifest that,
pricked by remorse--for my client is religious, in his way, and has a
conscience, as I shall prove later--and desiring to extenuate his sin
as far as possible, he has tried six times at least to substitute lay
nourishment for clerical. That this was merely an experiment we can
hardly doubt: for if it had been only a question of gastronomic variety,
six would have been too few; why only six? Why not thirty? But if we
regard it as an experiment, inspired by the fear of committing new
sacrilege, then this number six becomes intelligible. Six attempts
to calm his remorse, and the pricking of his conscience, would amply
suffice, for these attempts could scarcely have been happy ones. In
my humble opinion, a child is too small; I should say, not sufficient;
which would result in four or five times more lay children than monks
being required in a given time. The sin, lessened on the one hand, would
therefore be increased on the other, in quantity, not in quality. Please
understand, gentlemen, that in reasoning thus, I am taking the point of
view which might have been taken by a criminal of the middle ages. As
for myself, a man of the late nineteenth century, I, of course, should
reason differently; I say so plainly, and therefore you need not jeer
at me nor mock me, gentlemen. As for you, general, it is still more
unbecoming on your part. In the second place, and giving my own personal
opinion, a child's flesh is not a satisfying diet; it is too insipid,
too sweet; and the criminal, in making these experiments, could have
satisfied neither his conscience nor his appetite. I am about to
conclude, gentlemen; and my conclusion contains a reply to one of the
most important questions of that day and of our own! This criminal ended
at last by denouncing himself to the clergy, and giving himself up to
justice. We cannot but ask, remembering the penal system of that day,
and the tortures that awaited him--the wheel, the stake, the fire!--we
cannot but ask, I repeat, what induced him to accuse himself of this
crime? Why did he not simply stop short at the number sixty, and keep
his secret until his last breath? Why could he not simply leave the
monks alone, and go into the desert to repent? Or why not become a
monk himself? That is where the puzzle comes in! There must have been
something stronger than the stake or the fire, or even than the habits
of twenty years! There must have been an idea more powerful than all
the calamities and sorrows of this world, famine or torture, leprosy or
plague--an idea which entered into the heart, directed and enlarged the
springs of life, and made even that hell supportable to humanity!
Show me a force, a power like that, in this our century of vices
and railways! I might say, perhaps, in our century of steamboats and
railways, but I repeat in our century of vices and railways, because I
am drunk but truthful! Show me a single idea which unites men nowadays
with half the strength that it had in those centuries, and dare to
maintain that the 'springs of life' have not been polluted and weakened
beneath this 'star,' beneath this network in which men are entangled!
Don't talk to me about your prosperity, your riches, the rarity of
famine, the rapidity of the means of transport! There is more of riches,
but less of force. The idea uniting heart and soul to heart and soul
exists no more. All is loose, soft, limp--we are all of us limp....
Enough, gentlemen! I have done. That is not the question. No, the
question is now, excellency, I believe, to sit down to the banquet you
are about to provide for us!"

Lebedeff had roused great indignation in some of his auditors (it
should be remarked that the bottles were constantly uncorked during his
speech); but this unexpected conclusion calmed even the most turbulent
spirits. "That's how a clever barrister makes a good point!" said he,
when speaking of his peroration later on. The visitors began to laugh
and chatter once again; the committee left their seats, and stretched
their legs on the terrace. Keller alone was still disgusted with
Lebedeff and his speech; he turned from one to another, saying in a loud
voice:

"He attacks education, he boasts of the fanaticism of the twelfth
century, he makes absurd grimaces, and added to that he is by no means
the innocent he makes himself out to be. How did he get the money to buy
this house, allow me to ask?"

In another corner was the general, holding forth to a group of hearers,
among them Ptitsin, whom he had buttonholed. "I have known," said he,
"a real interpreter of the Apocalypse, the late Gregory Semeonovitch
Burmistroff, and he--he pierced the heart like a fiery flash! He began
by putting on his spectacles, then he opened a large black book;
his white beard, and his two medals on his breast, recalling acts of
charity, all added to his impressiveness. He began in a stern voice, and
before him generals, hard men of the world, bowed down, and ladies
fell to the ground fainting. But this one here--he ends by announcing a
banquet! That is not the real thing!"

Ptitsin listened and smiled, then turned as if to get his hat; but if he
had intended to leave, he changed his mind. Before the others had risen
from the table, Gania had suddenly left off drinking, and pushed away
his glass, a dark shadow seemed to come over his face. When they all
rose, he went and sat down by Rogojin. It might have been believed that
quite friendly relations existed between them. Rogojin, who had also
seemed on the point of going away now sat motionless, his head bent,
seeming to have forgotten his intention. He had drunk no wine, and
appeared absorbed in reflection. From time to time he raised his eyes,
and examined everyone present; one might have imagined that he was
expecting something very important to himself, and that he had decided
to wait for it. The prince had taken two or three glasses of champagne,
and seemed cheerful. As he rose he noticed Evgenie Pavlovitch, and,
remembering the appointment he had made with him, smiled pleasantly.
Evgenie Pavlovitch made a sign with his head towards Hippolyte, whom he
was attentively watching. The invalid was fast asleep, stretched out on
the sofa.

"Tell me, prince, why on earth did this boy intrude himself upon you?"
he asked, with such annoyance and irritation in his voice that the
prince was quite surprised. "I wouldn't mind laying odds that he is up
to some mischief."

"I have observed," said the prince, "that he seems to be an object of
very singular interest to you, Evgenie Pavlovitch. Why is it?"

"You may add that I have surely enough to think of, on my own account,
without him; and therefore it is all the more surprising that I cannot
tear my eyes and thoughts away from his detestable physiognomy."

"Oh, come! He has a handsome face."

"Why, look at him--look at him now!"

The prince glanced again at Evgenie Pavlovitch with considerable
surprise.

V.

HIPPOLYTE, who had fallen asleep during Lebedeff's discourse, now
suddenly woke up, just as though someone had jogged him in the side. He
shuddered, raised himself on his arm, gazed around, and grew very pale.
A look almost of terror crossed his face as he recollected.

"What! are they all off? Is it all over? Is the sun up?" He trembled,
and caught at the prince's hand. "What time is it? Tell me, quick, for
goodness' sake! How long have I slept?" he added, almost in despair,
just as though he had overslept something upon which his whole fate
depended.

"You have slept seven or perhaps eight minutes," said Evgenie
Pavlovitch.

Hippolyte gazed eagerly at the latter, and mused for a few moments.

"Oh, is that all?" he said at last. "Then I--"

He drew a long, deep breath of relief, as it seemed. He realized that
all was not over as yet, that the sun had not risen, and that the guests
had merely gone to supper. He smiled, and two hectic spots appeared on
his cheeks.

"So you counted the minutes while I slept, did you, Evgenie Pavlovitch?"
he said, ironically. "You have not taken your eyes off me all the
evening--I have noticed that much, you see! Ah, Rogojin! I've just
been dreaming about him, prince," he added, frowning. "Yes, by the by,"
starting up, "where's the orator? Where's Lebedeff? Has he finished?
What did he talk about? Is it true, prince, that you once declared that
'beauty would save the world'? Great Heaven! The prince says that beauty
saves the world! And I declare that he only has such playful ideas
because he's in love! Gentlemen, the prince is in love. I guessed it the
moment he came in. Don't blush, prince; you make me sorry for you. What
beauty saves the world? Colia told me that you are a zealous Christian;
is it so? Colia says you call yourself a Christian."

The prince regarded him attentively, but said nothing.

"You don't answer me; perhaps you think I am very fond of you?" added
Hippolyte, as though the words had been drawn from him.

"No, I don't think that. I know you don't love me."

"What, after yesterday? Wasn't I honest with you?"

"I knew yesterday that you didn't love me."

"Why so? why so? Because I envy you, eh? You always think that, I know.
But do you know why I am saying all this? Look here! I must have some
more champagne--pour me out some, Keller, will you?"

"No, you're not to drink any more, Hippolyte. I won't let you." The
prince moved the glass away.

"Well perhaps you're right," said Hippolyte, musing. "They might
say--yet, devil take them! what does it matter?--prince, what can it
matter what people will say of us THEN, eh? I believe I'm half asleep.
I've had such a dreadful dream--I've only just remembered it. Prince, I
don't wish you such dreams as that, though sure enough, perhaps, I DON'T
love you. Why wish a man evil, though you do not love him, eh? Give
me your hand--let me press it sincerely. There--you've given me your
hand--you must feel that I DO press it sincerely, don't you? I don't
think I shall drink any more. What time is it? Never mind, I know the
time. The time has come, at all events. What! they are laying supper
over there, are they? Then this table is free? Capital, gentlemen!
I--hem! these gentlemen are not listening. Prince, I will just read over
an article I have here. Supper is more interesting, of course, but--"

Here Hippolyte suddenly, and most unexpectedly, pulled out of his
breast-pocket a large sealed paper. This imposing-looking document he
placed upon the table before him.

The effect of this sudden action upon the company was instantaneous.
Evgenie Pavlovitch almost bounded off his chair in excitement. Rogojin
drew nearer to the table with a look on his face as if he knew what was
coming. Gania came nearer too; so did Lebedeff and the others--the paper
seemed to be an object of great interest to the company in general.

"What have you got there?" asked the prince, with some anxiety.

"At the first glimpse of the rising sun, prince, I will go to bed. I
told you I would, word of honour! You shall see!" cried Hippolyte.
"You think I'm not capable of opening this packet, do you?" He glared
defiantly round at the audience in general.

The prince observed that he was trembling all over.

"None of us ever thought such a thing!" Muishkin replied for all. "Why
should you suppose it of us? And what are you going to read, Hippolyte?
What is it?"

"Yes, what is it?" asked others. The packet sealed with red wax seemed
to attract everyone, as though it were a magnet.

"I wrote this yesterday, myself, just after I saw you, prince, and told
you I would come down here. I wrote all day and all night, and finished
it this morning early. Afterwards I had a dream."

"Hadn't we better hear it tomorrow?" asked the prince timidly.

"Tomorrow 'there will be no more time!'" laughed Hippolyte,
hysterically. "You needn't be afraid; I shall get through the whole
thing in forty minutes, at most an hour! Look how interested everybody
is! Everybody has drawn near. Look! look at them all staring at my
sealed packet! If I hadn't sealed it up it wouldn't have been half so
effective! Ha, ha! that's mystery, that is! Now then, gentlemen, shall
I break the seal or not? Say the word; it's a mystery, I tell you--a
secret! Prince, you know who said there would be 'no more time'? It was
the great and powerful angel in the Apocalypse."

"Better not read it now," said the prince, putting his hand on the
packet.

"No, don't read it!" cried Evgenie suddenly. He appeared so strangely
disturbed that many of those present could not help wondering.

"Reading? None of your reading now!" said somebody; "it's supper-time."
"What sort of an article is it? For a paper? Probably it's very
dull," said another. But the prince's timid gesture had impressed even
Hippolyte.

"Then I'm not to read it?" he whispered, nervously. "Am I not to read
it?" he repeated, gazing around at each face in turn. "What are you
afraid of, prince?" he turned and asked the latter suddenly.

"What should I be afraid of?"

"Has anyone a coin about them? Give me a twenty-copeck piece, somebody!"
And Hippolyte leapt from his chair.

"Here you are," said Lebedeff, handing him one; he thought the boy had
gone mad.

"Vera Lukianovna," said Hippolyte, "toss it, will you? Heads, I read,
tails, I don't."

Vera Lebedeff tossed the coin into the air and let it fall on the table.

It was "heads."

"Then I read it," said Hippolyte, in the tone of one bowing to the fiat
of destiny. He could not have grown paler if a verdict of death had
suddenly been presented to him.

"But after all, what is it? Is it possible that I should have just
risked my fate by tossing up?" he went on, shuddering; and looked round
him again. His eyes had a curious expression of sincerity. "That is
an astonishing psychological fact," he cried, suddenly addressing
the prince, in a tone of the most intense surprise. "It is... it
is something quite inconceivable, prince," he repeated with growing
animation, like a man regaining consciousness. "Take note of it,
prince, remember it; you collect, I am told, facts concerning capital
punishment... They told me so. Ha, ha! My God, how absurd!" He sat
down on the sofa, put his elbows on the table, and laid his head on
his hands. "It is shameful--though what does it matter to me if it is
shameful?

"Gentlemen, gentlemen! I am about to break the seal," he continued, with
determination. "I-I--of course I don't insist upon anyone listening if
they do not wish to."

With trembling fingers he broke the seal and drew out several sheets of
paper, smoothed them out before him, and began sorting them.

"What on earth does all this mean? What's he going to read?" muttered
several voices. Others said nothing; but one and all sat down and
watched with curiosity. They began to think something strange might
really be about to happen. Vera stood and trembled behind her father's
chair, almost in tears with fright; Colia was nearly as much alarmed
as she was. Lebedeff jumped up and put a couple of candles nearer to
Hippolyte, so that he might see better.

"Gentlemen, this--you'll soon see what this is," began Hippolyte, and
suddenly commenced his reading.

"It's headed, 'A Necessary Explanation,' with the motto, 'Apres moi
le deluge!' Oh, deuce take it all! Surely I can never have seriously
written such a silly motto as that? Look here, gentlemen, I beg to give
notice that all this is very likely terrible nonsense. It is only a few
ideas of mine. If you think that there is anything mysterious coming--or
in a word--"

"Better read on without any more beating about the bush," said Gania.

"Affectation!" remarked someone else.

"Too much talk," said Rogojin, breaking the silence for the first time.

Hippolyte glanced at him suddenly, and when their eye, met Rogojin
showed his teeth in a disagreeable smile, and said the following strange
words: "That's not the way to settle this business, my friend; that's
not the way at all."

Of course nobody knew what Rogojin meant by this; but his words made
a deep impression upon all. Everyone seemed to see in a flash the same
idea.

As for Hippolyte, their effect upon him was astounding. He trembled so
that the prince was obliged to support him, and would certainly have
cried out, but that his voice seemed to have entirely left him for the
moment. For a minute or two he could not speak at all, but panted and
stared at Rogojin. At last he managed to ejaculate:

"Then it was YOU who came--YOU--YOU?"

"Came where? What do you mean?" asked Rogojin, amazed. But Hippolyte,
panting and choking with excitement, interrupted him violently.

"YOU came to me last week, in the night, at two o'clock, the day I was
with you in the morning! Confess it was you!"

"Last week? In the night? Have you gone cracked, my good friend?"

Hippolyte paused and considered a moment. Then a smile of
cunning--almost triumph--crossed his lips.

"It was you," he murmured, almost in a whisper, but with absolute
conviction. "Yes, it was you who came to my room and sat silently on a
chair at my window for a whole hour--more! It was between one and two
at night; you rose and went out at about three. It was you, you! Why you
should have frightened me so, why you should have wished to torment me
like that, I cannot tell--but you it was."

There was absolute hatred in his eyes as he said this, but his look of
fear and his trembling had not left him.

"You shall hear all this directly, gentlemen. I-I--listen!"

He seized his paper in a desperate hurry; he fidgeted with it, and tried
to sort it, but for a long while his trembling hands could not collect
the sheets together. "He's either mad or delirious," murmured Rogojin.
At last he began.

For the first five minutes the reader's voice continued to tremble,
and he read disconnectedly and unevenly; but gradually his voice
strengthened. Occasionally a violent fit of coughing stopped him, but
his animation grew with the progress of the reading--as did also the
disagreeable impression which it made upon his audience,--until it
reached the highest pitch of excitement.

Here is the article.

MY NECESSARY EXPLANATION.

"Apres moi le deluge.

"Yesterday morning the prince came to see me. Among other things he
asked me to come down to his villa. I knew he would come and persuade
me to this step, and that he would adduce the argument that it would be
easier for me to die' among people and green trees,'--as he expressed
it. But today he did not say 'die,' he said 'live.' It is pretty much
the same to me, in my position, which he says. When I asked him why he
made such a point of his 'green trees,' he told me, to my astonishment,
that he had heard that last time I was in Pavlofsk I had said that I had
come 'to have a last look at the trees.'

"When I observed that it was all the same whether one died among trees
or in front of a blank brick wall, as here, and that it was not worth
making any fuss over a fortnight, he agreed at once. But he insisted
that the good air at Pavlofsk and the greenness would certainly cause a
physical change for the better, and that my excitement, and my DREAMS,
would be perhaps relieved. I remarked to him, with a smile, that he
spoke like a materialist, and he answered that he had always been one.
As he never tells a lie, there must be something in his words. His smile
is a pleasant one. I have had a good look at him. I don't know whether
I like him or not; and I have no time to waste over the question. The
hatred which I felt for him for five months has become considerably
modified, I may say, during the last month. Who knows, perhaps I am
going to Pavlofsk on purpose to see him! But why do I leave my chamber?
Those who are sentenced to death should not leave their cells. If I
had not formed a final resolve, but had decided to wait until the last
minute, I should not leave my room, or accept his invitation to come
and die at Pavlofsk. I must be quick and finish this explanation before
tomorrow. I shall have no time to read it over and correct it, for I
must read it tomorrow to the prince and two or three witnesses whom I
shall probably find there.

"As it will be absolutely true, without a touch of falsehood, I am
curious to see what impression it will make upon me myself at the moment
when I read it out. This is my 'last and solemn'--but why need I call
it that? There is no question about the truth of it, for it is not
worthwhile lying for a fortnight; a fortnight of life is not itself
worth having, which is a proof that I write nothing here but pure truth.

("N.B.--Let me remember to consider; am I mad at this moment, or not? or
rather at these moments? I have been told that consumptives sometimes
do go out of their minds for a while in the last stages of the malady.
I can prove this tomorrow when I read it out, by the impression it
makes upon the audience. I must settle this question once and for all,
otherwise I can't go on with anything.)

"I believe I have just written dreadful nonsense; but there's no time
for correcting, as I said before. Besides that, I have made myself a
promise not to alter a single word of what I write in this paper, even
though I find that I am contradicting myself every five lines. I wish to
verify the working of the natural logic of my ideas tomorrow during the
reading--whether I am capable of detecting logical errors, and whether
all that I have meditated over during the last six months be true, or
nothing but delirium.

"If two months since I had been called upon to leave my room and the
view of Meyer's wall opposite, I verily believe I should have been
sorry. But now I have no such feeling, and yet I am leaving this room
and Meyer's brick wall FOR EVER. So that my conclusion, that it is not
worth while indulging in grief, or any other emotion, for a fortnight,
has proved stronger than my very nature, and has taken over the
direction of my feelings. But is it so? Is it the case that my nature
is conquered entirely? If I were to be put on the rack now, I should
certainly cry out. I should not say that it is not worth while to yell
and feel pain because I have but a fortnight to live.

"But is it true that I have but a fortnight of life left to me? I know I
told some of my friends that Doctor B. had informed me that this was the
case; but I now confess that I lied; B. has not even seen me. However,
a week ago, I called in a medical student, Kislorodoff, who is a
Nationalist, an Atheist, and a Nihilist, by conviction, and that is why
I had him. I needed a man who would tell me the bare truth without any
humbug or ceremony--and so he did--indeed, almost with pleasure (which I
thought was going a little too far).

"Well, he plumped out that I had about a month left me; it might be a
little more, he said, under favourable circumstances, but it might
also be considerably less. According to his opinion I might die quite
suddenly--tomorrow, for instance--there had been such cases. Only a day
or two since a young lady at Colomna who suffered from consumption, and
was about on a par with myself in the march of the disease, was going
out to market to buy provisions, when she suddenly felt faint, lay down
on the sofa, gasped once, and died.

"Kislorodoff told me all this with a sort of exaggerated devil-may-care
negligence, and as though he did me great honour by talking to me
so, because it showed that he considered me the same sort of exalted
Nihilistic being as himself, to whom death was a matter of no
consequence whatever, either way.

"At all events, the fact remained--a month of life and no more! That he
is right in his estimation I am absolutely persuaded.

"It puzzles me much to think how on earth the prince guessed yesterday
that I have had bad dreams. He said to me, 'Your excitement and dreams
will find relief at Pavlofsk.' Why did he say 'dreams'? Either he is a
doctor, or else he is a man of exceptional intelligence and wonderful
powers of observation. (But that he is an 'idiot,' at bottom there can
be no doubt whatever.) It so happened that just before he arrived I had
a delightful little dream; one of a kind that I have hundreds of just
now. I had fallen asleep about an hour before he came in, and dreamed
that I was in some room, not my own. It was a large room, well
furnished, with a cupboard, chest of drawers, sofa, and my bed, a fine
wide bed covered with a silken counterpane. But I observed in the room
a dreadful-looking creature, a sort of monster. It was a little like a
scorpion, but was not a scorpion, but far more horrible, and especially
so, because there are no creatures anything like it in nature, and
because it had appeared to me for a purpose, and bore some mysterious
signification. I looked at the beast well; it was brown in colour and
had a shell; it was a crawling kind of reptile, about eight inches long,
and narrowed down from the head, which was about a couple of fingers in
width, to the end of the tail, which came to a fine point. Out of its
trunk, about a couple of inches below its head, came two legs at an
angle of forty-five degrees, each about three inches long, so that the
beast looked like a trident from above. It had eight hard needle-like
whiskers coming out from different parts of its body; it went along like
a snake, bending its body about in spite of the shell it wore, and its
motion was very quick and very horrible to look at. I was dreadfully
afraid it would sting me; somebody had told me, I thought, that it
was venomous; but what tormented me most of all was the wondering and
wondering as to who had sent it into my room, and what was the mystery
which I felt it contained.

"It hid itself under the cupboard and under the chest of drawers, and
crawled into the corners. I sat on a chair and kept my legs tucked
under me. Then the beast crawled quietly across the room and disappeared
somewhere near my chair. I looked about for it in terror, but I still
hoped that as my feet were safely tucked away it would not be able to
touch me.

"Suddenly I heard behind me, and about on a level with my head, a sort
of rattling sound. I turned sharp round and saw that the brute had
crawled up the wall as high as the level of my face, and that its
horrible tail, which was moving incredibly fast from side to side, was
actually touching my hair! I jumped up--and it disappeared. I did not
dare lie down on my bed for fear it should creep under my pillow. My
mother came into the room, and some friends of hers. They began to hunt
for the reptile and were more composed than I was; they did not seem to
be afraid of it. But they did not understand as I did.

"Suddenly the monster reappeared; it crawled slowly across the room and
made for the door, as though with some fixed intention, and with a slow
movement that was more horrible than ever.

"Then my mother opened the door and called my dog, Norma. Norma was a
great Newfoundland, and died five years ago.

"She sprang forward and stood still in front of the reptile as if she
had been turned to stone. The beast stopped too, but its tail and
claws still moved about. I believe animals are incapable of feeling
supernatural fright--if I have been rightly informed,--but at this
moment there appeared to me to be something more than ordinary about
Norma's terror, as though it must be supernatural; and as though she
felt, just as I did myself, that this reptile was connected with some
mysterious secret, some fatal omen.

"Norma backed slowly and carefully away from the brute, which followed
her, creeping deliberately after her as though it intended to make a
sudden dart and sting her.

"In spite of Norma's terror she looked furious, though she trembled in
all her limbs. At length she slowly bared her terrible teeth, opened
her great red jaws, hesitated--took courage, and seized the beast in her
mouth. It seemed to try to dart out of her jaws twice, but Norma caught
at it and half swallowed it as it was escaping. The shell cracked in her
teeth; and the tail and legs stuck out of her mouth and shook about in
a horrible manner. Suddenly Norma gave a piteous whine; the reptile had
bitten her tongue. She opened her mouth wide with the pain, and I saw
the beast lying across her tongue, and out of its body, which was almost
bitten in two, came a hideous white-looking substance, oozing out into
Norma's mouth; it was of the consistency of a crushed black-beetle just
then I awoke and the prince entered the room."

"Gentlemen!" said Hippolyte, breaking off here, "I have not done yet,
but it seems to me that I have written down a great deal here that is
unnecessary,--this dream--"

"You have indeed!" said Gania.

"There is too much about myself, I know, but--" As Hippolyte said this
his face wore a tired, pained look, and he wiped the sweat off his brow.

"Yes," said Lebedeff, "you certainly think a great deal too much about
yourself."

"Well--gentlemen--I do not force anyone to listen! If any of you are
unwilling to sit it out, please go away, by all means!"

"He turns people out of a house that isn't his own," muttered Rogojin.

"Suppose we all go away?" said Ferdishenko suddenly.

Hippolyte clutched his manuscript, and gazing at the last speaker with
glittering eyes, said: "You don't like me at all!" A few laughed at
this, but not all.

"Hippolyte," said the prince, "give me the papers, and go to bed like a
sensible fellow. We'll have a good talk tomorrow, but you really mustn't
go on with this reading; it is not good for you!"

"How can I? How can I?" cried Hippolyte, looking at him in amazement.
"Gentlemen! I was a fool! I won't break off again. Listen, everyone who
wants to!"

He gulped down some water out of a glass standing near, bent over the
table, in order to hide his face from the audience, and recommenced.

"The idea that it is not worth while living for a few weeks took
possession of me a month ago, when I was told that I had four weeks to
live, but only partially so at that time. The idea quite overmastered me
three days since, that evening at Pavlofsk. The first time that I felt
really impressed with this thought was on the terrace at the prince's,
at the very moment when I had taken it into my head to make a last trial
of life. I wanted to see people and trees (I believe I said so myself),
I got excited, I maintained Burdovsky's rights, 'my neighbour!'--I
dreamt that one and all would open their arms, and embrace me, that
there would be an indescribable exchange of forgiveness between us all!
In a word, I behaved like a fool, and then, at that very same instant, I
felt my 'last conviction.' I ask myself now how I could have waited six
months for that conviction! I knew that I had a disease that spares
no one, and I really had no illusions; but the more I realized my
condition, the more I clung to life; I wanted to live at any price. I
confess I might well have resented that blind, deaf fate, which, with no
apparent reason, seemed to have decided to crush me like a fly; but why
did I not stop at resentment? Why did I begin to live, knowing that it
was not worthwhile to begin? Why did I attempt to do what I knew to be
an impossibility? And yet I could not even read a book to the end; I
had given up reading. What is the good of reading, what is the good of
learning anything, for just six months? That thought has made me throw
aside a book more than once.

"Yes, that wall of Meyer's could tell a tale if it liked. There was no
spot on its dirty surface that I did not know by heart. Accursed wall!
and yet it is dearer to me than all the Pavlofsk trees!--That is--it
WOULD be dearer if it were not all the same to me, now!

"I remember now with what hungry interest I began to watch the lives of
other people--interest that I had never felt before! I used to wait for
Colia's arrival impatiently, for I was so ill myself, then, that I could
not leave the house. I so threw myself into every little detail of news,
and took so much interest in every report and rumour, that I believe I
became a regular gossip! I could not understand, among other things, how
all these people--with so much life in and before them--do not become
RICH--and I don't understand it now. I remember being told of a poor
wretch I once knew, who had died of hunger. I was almost beside myself
with rage! I believe if I could have resuscitated him I would have done
so for the sole purpose of murdering him!

"Occasionally I was so much better that I could go out; but the streets
used to put me in such a rage that I would lock myself up for days
rather than go out, even if I were well enough to do so! I could
not bear to see all those preoccupied, anxious-looking creatures
continuously surging along the streets past me! Why are they always
anxious? What is the meaning of their eternal care and worry? It is
their wickedness, their perpetual detestable malice--that's what it
is--they are all full of malice, malice!

"Whose fault is it that they are all miserable, that they don't know how
to live, though they have fifty or sixty years of life before them? Why
did that fool allow himself to die of hunger with sixty years of unlived
life before him?

"And everyone of them shows his rags, his toil-worn hands, and yells in
his wrath: 'Here are we, working like cattle all our lives, and always
as hungry as dogs, and there are others who do not work, and are fat and
rich!' The eternal refrain! And side by side with them trots along some
wretched fellow who has known better days, doing light porter's work
from morn to night for a living, always blubbering and saying that
'his wife died because he had no money to buy medicine with,' and his
children dying of cold and hunger, and his eldest daughter gone to the
bad, and so on. Oh! I have no pity and no patience for these fools of
people. Why can't they be Rothschilds? Whose fault is it that a man has
not got millions of money like Rothschild? If he has life, all this must
be in his power! Whose fault is it that he does not know how to live his
life?

"Oh! it's all the same to me now--NOW! But at that time I would soak my
pillow at night with tears of mortification, and tear at my blanket in
my rage and fury. Oh, how I longed at that time to be turned out--ME,
eighteen years old, poor, half-clothed, turned out into the street,
quite alone, without lodging, without work, without a crust of bread,
without relations, without a single acquaintance, in some large
town--hungry, beaten (if you like), but in good health--and THEN I would
show them--

"What would I show them?

"Oh, don't think that I have no sense of my own humiliation! I have
suffered already in reading so far. Which of you all does not think me a
fool at this moment--a young fool who knows nothing of life--forgetting
that to live as I have lived these last six months is to live longer
than grey-haired old men. Well, let them laugh, and say it is all
nonsense, if they please. They may say it is all fairy-tales, if they
like; and I have spent whole nights telling myself fairy-tales. I
remember them all. But how can I tell fairy-tales now? The time for them
is over. They amused me when I found that there was not even time for me
to learn the Greek grammar, as I wanted to do. 'I shall die before I get
to the syntax,' I thought at the first page--and threw the book under
the table. It is there still, for I forbade anyone to pick it up.

"If this 'Explanation' gets into anybody's hands, and they have patience
to read it through, they may consider me a madman, or a schoolboy, or,
more likely, a man condemned to die, who thought it only natural to
conclude that all men, excepting himself, esteem life far too lightly,
live it far too carelessly and lazily, and are, therefore, one and all,
unworthy of it. Well, I affirm that my reader is wrong again, for my
convictions have nothing to do with my sentence of death. Ask them, ask
any one of them, or all of them, what they mean by happiness! Oh, you
may be perfectly sure that if Columbus was happy, it was not after he
had discovered America, but when he was discovering it! You may be quite
sure that he reached the culminating point of his happiness three days
before he saw the New World with his actual eyes, when his mutinous
sailors wanted to tack about, and return to Europe! What did the New
World matter after all? Columbus had hardly seen it when he died, and
in reality he was entirely ignorant of what he had discovered. The
important thing is life--life and nothing else! What is any 'discovery'
whatever compared with the incessant, eternal discovery of life?

"But what is the use of talking? I'm afraid all this is so commonplace
that my confession will be taken for a schoolboy exercise--the work of
some ambitious lad writing in the hope of his work 'seeing the light';
or perhaps my readers will say that 'I had perhaps something to say, but
did not know how to express it.'

"Let me add to this that in every idea emanating from genius, or even in
every serious human idea--born in the human brain--there always remains
something--some sediment--which cannot be expressed to others, though
one wrote volumes and lectured upon it for five-and-thirty years. There
is always a something, a remnant, which will never come out from your
brain, but will remain there with you, and you alone, for ever and ever,
and you will die, perhaps, without having imparted what may be the very
essence of your idea to a single living soul.

"So that if I cannot now impart all that has tormented me for the last
six months, at all events you will understand that, having reached my
'last convictions,' I must have paid a very dear price for them. That
is what I wished, for reasons of my own, to make a point of in this my
'Explanation.'

"But let me resume."

VI.

"I WILL not deceive you. 'Reality' got me so entrapped in its meshes now
and again during the past six months, that I forgot my 'sentence' (or
perhaps I did not wish to think of it), and actually busied myself with
affairs.

"A word as to my circumstances. When, eight months since, I became
very ill, I threw up all my old connections and dropped all my old
companions. As I was always a gloomy, morose sort of individual, my
friends easily forgot me; of course, they would have forgotten me all
the same, without that excuse. My position at home was solitary enough.
Five months ago I separated myself entirely from the family, and no one
dared enter my room except at stated times, to clean and tidy it, and so
on, and to bring me my meals. My mother dared not disobey me; she kept
the children quiet, for my sake, and beat them if they dared to make any
noise and disturb me. I so often complained of them that I should think
they must be very fond, indeed, of me by this time. I think I must have
tormented 'my faithful Colia' (as I called him) a good deal too. He
tormented me of late; I could see that he always bore my tempers as
though he had determined to 'spare the poor invalid.' This annoyed
me, naturally. He seemed to have taken it into his head to imitate the
prince in Christian meekness! Surikoff, who lived above us, annoyed me,
too. He was so miserably poor, and I used to prove to him that he had no
one to blame but himself for his poverty. I used to be so angry that I
think I frightened him eventually, for he stopped coming to see me. He
was a most meek and humble fellow, was Surikoff. (N.B.--They say that
meekness is a great power. I must ask the prince about this, for the
expression is his.) But I remember one day in March, when I went up to
his lodgings to see whether it was true that one of his children had
been starved and frozen to death, I began to hold forth to him about
his poverty being his own fault, and, in the course of my remarks, I
accidentally smiled at the corpse of his child. Well, the poor wretch's
lips began to tremble, and he caught me by the shoulder, and pushed me
to the door. 'Go out,' he said, in a whisper. I went out, of course, and
I declare I LIKED it. I liked it at the very moment when I was
turned out. But his words filled me with a strange sort of feeling of
disdainful pity for him whenever I thought of them--a feeling which
I did not in the least desire to entertain. At the very moment of the
insult (for I admit that I did insult him, though I did not mean to),
this man could not lose his temper. His lips had trembled, but I swear
it was not with rage. He had taken me by the arm, and said, 'Go out,'
without the least anger. There was dignity, a great deal of dignity,
about him, and it was so inconsistent with the look of him that, I
assure you, it was quite comical. But there was no anger. Perhaps he
merely began to despise me at that moment.

"Since that time he has always taken off his hat to me on the stairs,
whenever I met him, which is a thing he never did before; but he always
gets away from me as quickly as he can, as though he felt confused. If
he did despise me, he despised me 'meekly,' after his own fashion.

"I dare say he only took his hat off out of fear, as it were, to the son
of his creditor; for he always owed my mother money. I thought of having
an explanation with him, but I knew that if I did, he would begin to
apologize in a minute or two, so I decided to let him alone.

"Just about that time, that is, the middle of March, I suddenly felt
very much better; this continued for a couple of weeks. I used to go
out at dusk. I like the dusk, especially in March, when the night frost
begins to harden the day's puddles, and the gas is burning.

"Well, one night in the Shestilavochnaya, a man passed me with a paper
parcel under his arm. I did not take stock of him very carefully, but he
seemed to be dressed in some shabby summer dust-coat, much too light for
the season. When he was opposite the lamp-post, some ten yards away, I
observed something fall out of his pocket. I hurried forward to pick it
up, just in time, for an old wretch in a long kaftan rushed up too.
He did not dispute the matter, but glanced at what was in my hand and
disappeared.

"It was a large old-fashioned pocket-book, stuffed full; but I guessed,
at a glance, that it had anything in the world inside it, except money.

"The owner was now some forty yards ahead of me, and was very soon lost
in the crowd. I ran after him, and began calling out; but as I knew
nothing to say excepting 'hey!' he did not turn round. Suddenly he
turned into the gate of a house to the left; and when I darted in after
him, the gateway was so dark that I could see nothing whatever. It was
one of those large houses built in small tenements, of which there must
have been at least a hundred.

"When I entered the yard I thought I saw a man going along on the far
side of it; but it was so dark I could not make out his figure.

"I crossed to that corner and found a dirty dark staircase. I heard a
man mounting up above me, some way higher than I was, and thinking I
should catch him before his door would be opened to him, I rushed after
him. I heard a door open and shut on the fifth storey, as I panted
along; the stairs were narrow, and the steps innumerable, but at last I
reached the door I thought the right one. Some moments passed before I
found the bell and got it to ring.

"An old peasant woman opened the door; she was busy lighting the
'samovar' in a tiny kitchen. She listened silently to my questions, did
not understand a word, of course, and opened another door leading into
a little bit of a room, low and scarcely furnished at all, but with
a large, wide bed in it, hung with curtains. On this bed lay one
Terentich, as the woman called him, drunk, it appeared to me. On the
table was an end of candle in an iron candlestick, and a half-bottle of
vodka, nearly finished. Terentich muttered something to me, and signed
towards the next room. The old woman had disappeared, so there was
nothing for me to do but to open the door indicated. I did so, and
entered the next room.

"This was still smaller than the other, so cramped that I could scarcely
turn round; a narrow single bed at one side took up nearly all the room.
Besides the bed there were only three common chairs, and a wretched old
kitchen-table standing before a small sofa. One could hardly squeeze
through between the table and the bed.

"On the table, as in the other room, burned a tallow candle-end in an
iron candlestick; and on the bed there whined a baby of scarcely three
weeks old. A pale-looking woman was dressing the child, probably the
mother; she looked as though she had not as yet got over the trouble of
childbirth, she seemed so weak and was so carelessly dressed. Another
child, a little girl of about three years old, lay on the sofa, covered
over with what looked like a man's old dress-coat.

"At the table stood a man in his shirt sleeves; he had thrown off his
coat; it lay upon the bed; and he was unfolding a blue paper parcel in
which were a couple of pounds of bread, and some little sausages.

"On the table along with these things were a few old bits of black
bread, and some tea in a pot. From under the bed there protruded an
open portmanteau full of bundles of rags. In a word, the confusion and
untidiness of the room were indescribable.

"It appeared to me, at the first glance, that both the man and the woman
were respectable people, but brought to that pitch of poverty where
untidiness seems to get the better of every effort to cope with it, till
at last they take a sort of bitter satisfaction in it. When I entered
the room, the man, who had entered but a moment before me, and was still
unpacking his parcels, was saying something to his wife in an excited
manner. The news was apparently bad, as usual, for the woman began
whimpering. The man's face seemed tome to be refined and even pleasant.
He was dark-complexioned, and about twenty-eight years of age; he wore
black whiskers, and his lip and chin were shaved. He looked morose, but
with a sort of pride of expression. A curious scene followed.

"There are people who find satisfaction in their own touchy feelings,
especially when they have just taken the deepest offence; at such
moments they feel that they would rather be offended than not. These
easily-ignited natures, if they are wise, are always full of remorse
afterwards, when they reflect that they have been ten times as angry as
they need have been.

"The gentleman before me gazed at me for some seconds in amazement,
and his wife in terror; as though there was something alarmingly
extraordinary in the fact that anyone could come to see them. But
suddenly he fell upon me almost with fury; I had had no time to mutter
more than a couple of words; but he had doubtless observed that I was
decently dressed and, therefore, took deep offence because I had dared
enter his den so unceremoniously, and spy out the squalor and untidiness
of it.

"Of course he was delighted to get hold of someone upon whom to vent his
rage against things in general.

"For a moment I thought he would assault me; he grew so pale that he
looked like a woman about to have hysterics; his wife was dreadfully
alarmed.

"'How dare you come in so? Be off!' he shouted, trembling all over with
rage and scarcely able to articulate the words. Suddenly, however, he
observed his pocketbook in my hand.

"'I think you dropped this,' I remarked, as quietly and drily as I
could. (I thought it best to treat him so.) For some while he stood
before me in downright terror, and seemed unable to understand. He then
suddenly grabbed at his side-pocket, opened his mouth in alarm, and beat
his forehead with his hand.

"'My God!' he cried, 'where did you find it? How?' I explained in as few
words as I could, and as drily as possible, how I had seen it and picked
it up; how I had run after him, and called out to him, and how I had
followed him upstairs and groped my way to his door.

"'Gracious Heaven!' he cried, 'all our papers are in it! My dear
sir, you little know what you have done for us. I should have been
lost--lost!'

"I had taken hold of the door-handle meanwhile, intending to leave
the room without reply; but I was panting with my run upstairs, and my
exhaustion came to a climax in a violent fit of coughing, so bad that I
could hardly stand.

"I saw how the man dashed about the room to find me an empty chair, how
he kicked the rags off a chair which was covered up by them, brought it
to me, and helped me to sit down; but my cough went on for another three
minutes or so. When I came to myself he was sitting by me on another
chair, which he had also cleared of the rubbish by throwing it all over
the floor, and was watching me intently.

"'I'm afraid you are ill?' he remarked, in the tone which doctors use
when they address a patient. 'I am myself a medical man' (he did not say
'doctor'), with which words he waved his hands towards the room and
its contents as though in protest at his present condition. 'I see that
you--'

"'I'm in consumption,' I said laconically, rising from my seat.

"He jumped up, too.

"'Perhaps you are exaggerating--if you were to take proper measures
perhaps--"

"He was terribly confused and did not seem able to collect his scattered
senses; the pocket-book was still in his left hand.

"'Oh, don't mind me,' I said. 'Dr. B---- saw me last week' (I lugged him
in again), 'and my hash is quite settled; pardon me-' I took hold of the
door-handle again. I was on the point of opening the door and leaving my
grateful but confused medical friend to himself and his shame, when my
damnable cough got hold of me again.

"My doctor insisted on my sitting down again to get my breath. He now
said something to his wife who, without leaving her place, addressed a
few words of gratitude and courtesy to me. She seemed very shy over it,
and her sickly face flushed up with confusion. I remained, but with the
air of a man who knows he is intruding and is anxious to get away. The
doctor's remorse at last seemed to need a vent, I could see.

"'If I--' he began, breaking off abruptly every other moment, and
starting another sentence. 'I-I am so very grateful to you, and I am so
much to blame in your eyes, I feel sure, I--you see--' (he pointed to
the room again) 'at this moment I am in such a position-'

"'Oh!' I said, 'there's nothing to see; it's quite a clear case--you've
lost your post and have come up to make explanations and get another, if
you can!'

"'How do you know that?' he asked in amazement.

"'Oh, it was evident at the first glance,' I said ironically, but
not intentionally so. 'There are lots of people who come up from the
provinces full of hope, and run about town, and have to live as best
they can.'

"He began to talk at once excitedly and with trembling lips; he began
complaining and telling me his story. He interested me, I confess; I sat
there nearly an hour. His story was a very ordinary one. He had been a
provincial doctor; he had a civil appointment, and had no sooner taken
it up than intrigues began. Even his wife was dragged into these. He was
proud, and flew into a passion; there was a change of local government
which acted in favour of his opponents; his position was undermined,
complaints were made against him; he lost his post and came up to
Petersburg with his last remaining money, in order to appeal to higher
authorities. Of course nobody would listen to him for a long time; he
would come and tell his story one day and be refused promptly; another
day he would be fed on false promises; again he would be treated
harshly; then he would be told to sign some documents; then he would
sign the paper and hand it in, and they would refuse to receive it, and
tell him to file a formal petition. In a word he had been driven about
from office to office for five months and had spent every farthing he
had; his wife's last rags had just been pawned; and meanwhile a child
had been born to them and--and today I have a final refusal to my
petition, and I have hardly a crumb of bread left--I have nothing left;
my wife has had a baby lately--and I-I--'

"He sprang up from his chair and turned away. His wife was crying in the
corner; the child had begun to moan again. I pulled out my note-book and
began writing in it. When I had finished and rose from my chair he was
standing before me with an expression of alarmed curiosity.

"'I have jotted down your name,' I told him, 'and all the rest of
it--the place you served at, the district, the date, and all. I have a
friend, Bachmatoff, whose uncle is a councillor of state and has to do
with these matters, one Peter Matveyevitch Bachmatoff.'

"'Peter Matveyevitch Bachmatoff!' he cried, trembling all over with
excitement. 'Why, nearly everything depends on that very man!'

"It is very curious, this story of the medical man, and my visit, and
the happy termination to which I contributed by accident! Everything
fitted in, as in a novel. I told the poor people not to put much hope in
me, because I was but a poor schoolboy myself--(I am not really, but
I humiliated myself as much as possible in order to make them less
hopeful)--but that I would go at once to the Vassili Ostroff and see my
friend; and that as I knew for certain that his uncle adored him, and
was absolutely devoted to him as the last hope and branch of the family,
perhaps the old man might do something to oblige his nephew.

"'If only they would allow me to explain all to his excellency! If I
could but be permitted to tell my tale to him!" he cried, trembling with
feverish agitation, and his eyes flashing with excitement. I repeated
once more that I could not hold out much hope--that it would probably
end in smoke, and if I did not turn up next morning they must make up
their minds that there was no more to be done in the matter.

"They showed me out with bows and every kind of respect; they seemed
quite beside themselves. I shall never forget the expression of their
faces!

"I took a droshky and drove over to the Vassili Ostroff at once. For
some years I had been at enmity with this young Bachmatoff, at school.
We considered him an aristocrat; at all events I called him one. He used
to dress smartly, and always drove to school in a private trap. He was
a good companion, and was always merry and jolly, sometimes even witty,
though he was not very intellectual, in spite of the fact that he was
always top of the class; I myself was never top in anything! All his
companions were very fond of him, excepting myself. He had several times
during those years come up to me and tried to make friends; but I had
always turned sulkily away and refused to have anything to do with him.
I had not seen him for a whole year now; he was at the university. When,
at nine o'clock, or so, this evening, I arrived and was shown up to him
with great ceremony, he first received me with astonishment, and not too
affably, but he soon cheered up, and suddenly gazed intently at me and
burst out laughing.

"'Why, what on earth can have possessed you to come and see ME,
Terentieff?' he cried, with his usual pleasant, sometimes audacious, but
never offensive familiarity, which I liked in reality, but for which I
also detested him. 'Why what's the matter?' he cried in alarm. 'Are you
ill?'

"That confounded cough of mine had come on again; I fell into a chair,
and with difficulty recovered my breath. 'It's all right, it's only
consumption' I said. 'I have come to you with a petition!'

"He sat down in amazement, and I lost no time in telling him the medical
man's history; and explained that he, with the influence which he
possessed over his uncle, might do some good to the poor fellow.

"'I'll do it--I'll do it, of course!' he said. 'I shall attack my uncle
about it tomorrow morning, and I'm very glad you told me the story. But
how was it that you thought of coming to me about it, Terentieff?'

"'So much depends upon your uncle,' I said. 'And besides we have always
been enemies, Bachmatoff; and as you are a generous sort of fellow, I
thought you would not refuse my request because I was your enemy!' I
added with irony.

"'Like Napoleon going to England, eh?' cried he, laughing. 'I'll do it
though--of course, and at once, if I can!' he added, seeing that I rose
seriously from my chair at this point.

"And sure enough the matter ended as satisfactorily as possible. A month
or so later my medical friend was appointed to another post. He got his
travelling expenses paid, and something to help him to start life with
once more. I think Bachmatoff must have persuaded the doctor to accept
a loan from himself. I saw Bachmatoff two or three times, about this
period, the third time being when he gave a farewell dinner to the
doctor and his wife before their departure, a champagne dinner.

"Bachmatoff saw me home after the dinner and we crossed the Nicolai
bridge. We were both a little drunk. He told me of his joy, the joyful
feeling of having done a good action; he said that it was all thanks to
myself that he could feel this satisfaction; and held forth about the
foolishness of the theory that individual charity is useless.

"I, too, was burning to have my say!

"'In Moscow,' I said, 'there was an old state counsellor, a civil
general, who, all his life, had been in the habit of visiting the
prisons and speaking to criminals. Every party of convicts on its way
to Siberia knew beforehand that on the Vorobeef Hills the "old general"
would pay them a visit. He did all he undertook seriously and devotedly.
He would walk down the rows of the unfortunate prisoners, stop before
each individual and ask after his needs--he never sermonized them; he
spoke kindly to them--he gave them money; he brought them all sorts of
necessaries for the journey, and gave them devotional books, choosing
those who could read, under the firm conviction that they would read to
those who could not, as they went along.

"'He scarcely ever talked about the particular crimes of any of them,
but listened if any volunteered information on that point. All the
convicts were equal for him, and he made no distinction. He spoke to all
as to brothers, and every one of them looked upon him as a father. When
he observed among the exiles some poor woman with a child, he would
always come forward and fondle the little one, and make it laugh. He
continued these acts of mercy up to his very death; and by that time all
the criminals, all over Russia and Siberia, knew him!

"'A man I knew who had been to Siberia and returned, told me that he
himself had been a witness of how the very most hardened criminals
remembered the old general, though, in point of fact, he could never,
of course, have distributed more than a few pence to each member of a
party. Their recollection of him was not sentimental or particularly
devoted. Some wretch, for instance, who had been a murderer--cutting the
throat of a dozen fellow-creatures, for instance; or stabbing six
little children for his own amusement (there have been such men!)--would
perhaps, without rhyme or reason, suddenly give a sigh and say, "I
wonder whether that old general is alive still!" Although perhaps he had
not thought of mentioning him for a dozen years before! How can one say
what seed of good may have been dropped into his soul, never to die?'

"I continued in that strain for a long while, pointing out to Bachmatoff
how impossible it is to follow up the effects of any isolated good deed
one may do, in all its influences and subtle workings upon the heart and
after-actions of others.

"'And to think that you are to be cut off from life!' remarked
Bachmatoff, in a tone of reproach, as though he would like to find
someone to pitch into on my account.

"We were leaning over the balustrade of the bridge, looking into the
Neva at this moment.

"'Do you know what has suddenly come into my head?' said I,
suddenly--leaning further and further over the rail.

"'Surely not to throw yourself into the river?' cried Bachmatoff in
alarm. Perhaps he read my thought in my face.

"'No, not yet. At present nothing but the following consideration. You
see I have some two or three months left me to live--perhaps four; well,
supposing that when I have but a month or two more, I take a fancy for
some "good deed" that needs both trouble and time, like this business of
our doctor friend, for instance: why, I shall have to give up the idea
of it and take to something else--some LITTLE good deed, MORE WITHIN MY
MEANS, eh? Isn't that an amusing idea!'

"Poor Bachmatoff was much impressed--painfully so. He took me all the
way home; not attempting to console me, but behaving with the greatest
delicacy. On taking leave he pressed my hand warmly and asked permission
to come and see me. I replied that if he came to me as a 'comforter,' so
to speak (for he would be in that capacity whether he spoke to me in a
soothing manner or only kept silence, as I pointed out to him), he
would but remind me each time of my approaching death! He shrugged his
shoulders, but quite agreed with me; and we parted better friends than I
had expected.

"But that evening and that night were sown the first seeds of my 'last
conviction.' I seized greedily on my new idea; I thirstily drank in
all its different aspects (I did not sleep a wink that night!), and the
deeper I went into it the more my being seemed to merge itself in it,
and the more alarmed I became. A dreadful terror came over me at last,
and did not leave me all next day.

"Sometimes, thinking over this, I became quite numb with the terror
of it; and I might well have deduced from this fact, that my 'last
conviction' was eating into my being too fast and too seriously, and
would undoubtedly come to its climax before long. And for the climax I
needed greater determination than I yet possessed.

"However, within three weeks my determination was taken, owing to a very
strange circumstance.

"Here on my paper, I make a note of all the figures and dates that
come into my explanation. Of course, it is all the same to me, but just
now--and perhaps only at this moment--I desire that all those who are to
judge of my action should see clearly out of how logical a sequence of
deductions has at length proceeded my 'last conviction.'

"I have said above that the determination needed by me for the
accomplishment of my final resolve, came to hand not through any
sequence of causes, but thanks to a certain strange circumstance which
had perhaps no connection whatever with the matter at issue. Ten days
ago Rogojin called upon me about certain business of his own with which
I have nothing to do at present. I had never seen Rogojin before, but
had often heard about him.

"I gave him all the information he needed, and he very soon took his
departure; so that, since he only came for the purpose of gaining the
information, the matter might have been expected to end there.

"But he interested me too much, and all that day I was under the
influence of strange thoughts connected with him, and I determined to
return his visit the next day.

"Rogojin was evidently by no means pleased to see me, and hinted,
delicately, that he saw no reason why our acquaintance should continue.
For all that, however, I spent a very interesting hour, and so, I dare
say, did he. There was so great a contrast between us that I am sure we
must both have felt it; anyhow, I felt it acutely. Here was I, with my
days numbered, and he, a man in the full vigour of life, living in
the present, without the slightest thought for 'final convictions,' or
numbers, or days, or, in fact, for anything but that which-which--well,
which he was mad about, if he will excuse me the expression--as a feeble
author who cannot express his ideas properly.

"In spite of his lack of amiability, I could not help seeing, in Rogojin
a man of intellect and sense; and although, perhaps, there was little in
the outside world which was of interest to him, still he was clearly a
man with eyes to see.

"I hinted nothing to him about my 'final conviction,' but it appeared
to me that he had guessed it from my words. He remained silent--he is
a terribly silent man. I remarked to him, as I rose to depart, that,
in spite of the contrast and the wide differences between us two,
les extremites se touchent ('extremes meet,' as I explained to him in
Russian); so that maybe he was not so far from my final conviction as
appeared.

"His only reply to this was a sour grimace. He rose and looked for
my cap, and placed it in my hand, and led me out of the house--that
dreadful gloomy house of his--to all appearances, of course, as though I
were leaving of my own accord, and he were simply seeing me to the
door out of politeness. His house impressed me much; it is like a
burial-ground, he seems to like it, which is, however, quite natural.
Such a full life as he leads is so overflowing with absorbing interests
that he has little need of assistance from his surroundings.

"The visit to Rogojin exhausted me terribly. Besides, I had felt ill
since the morning; and by evening I was so weak that I took to my bed,
and was in high fever at intervals, and even delirious. Colia sat with
me until eleven o'clock.

"Yet I remember all he talked about, and every word we said, though
whenever my eyes closed for a moment I could picture nothing but the
image of Surikoff just in the act of finding a million roubles. He could
not make up his mind what to do with the money, and tore his hair over
it. He trembled with fear that somebody would rob him, and at last
he decided to bury it in the ground. I persuaded him that, instead of
putting it all away uselessly underground, he had better melt it down
and make a golden coffin out of it for his starved child, and then dig
up the little one and put her into the golden coffin. Surikoff accepted
this suggestion, I thought, with tears of gratitude, and immediately
commenced to carry out my design.

"I thought I spat on the ground and left him in disgust. Colia told
me, when I quite recovered my senses, that I had not been asleep for a
moment, but that I had spoken to him about Surikoff the whole while.

"At moments I was in a state of dreadful weakness and misery, so that
Colia was greatly disturbed when he left me.

"When I arose to lock the door after him, I suddenly called to mind a
picture I had noticed at Rogojin's in one of his gloomiest rooms, over
the door. He had pointed it out to me himself as we walked past it, and
I believe I must have stood a good five minutes in front of it. There
was nothing artistic about it, but the picture made me feel strangely
uncomfortable. It represented Christ just taken down from the cross. It
seems to me that painters as a rule represent the Saviour, both on the
cross and taken down from it, with great beauty still upon His face.
This marvellous beauty they strive to preserve even in His moments of
deepest agony and passion. But there was no such beauty in Rogojin's
picture. This was the presentment of a poor mangled body which had
evidently suffered unbearable anguish even before its crucifixion, full
of wounds and bruises, marks of the violence of soldiers and people, and
of the bitterness of the moment when He had fallen with the cross--all
this combined with the anguish of the actual crucifixion.

"The face was depicted as though still suffering; as though the body,
only just dead, was still almost quivering with agony. The picture was
one of pure nature, for the face was not beautified by the artist, but
was left as it would naturally be, whosoever the sufferer, after such
anguish.

"I know that the earliest Christian faith taught that the Saviour
suffered actually and not figuratively, and that nature was allowed her
own way even while His body was on the cross.

"It is strange to look on this dreadful picture of the mangled corpse
of the Saviour, and to put this question to oneself: 'Supposing that the
disciples, the future apostles, the women who had followed Him and stood
by the cross, all of whom believed in and worshipped Him--supposing
that they saw this tortured body, this face so mangled and bleeding and
bruised (and they MUST have so seen it)--how could they have gazed upon
the dreadful sight and yet have believed that He would rise again?'

"The thought steps in, whether one likes it or no, that death is so
terrible and so powerful, that even He who conquered it in His miracles
during life was unable to triumph over it at the last. He who called
to Lazarus, 'Lazarus, come forth!' and the dead man lived--He was now
Himself a prey to nature and death. Nature appears to one, looking at
this picture, as some huge, implacable, dumb monster; or still better--a
stranger simile--some enormous mechanical engine of modern days which
has seized and crushed and swallowed up a great and invaluable Being,
a Being worth nature and all her laws, worth the whole earth, which was
perhaps created merely for the sake of the advent of that Being.

"This blind, dumb, implacable, eternal, unreasoning force is well shown
in the picture, and the absolute subordination of all men and things to
it is so well expressed that the idea unconsciously arises in the mind
of anyone who looks at it. All those faithful people who were gazing at
the cross and its mutilated occupant must have suffered agony of mind
that evening; for they must have felt that all their hopes and almost
all their faith had been shattered at a blow. They must have separated
in terror and dread that night, though each perhaps carried away with
him one great thought which was never eradicated from his mind for ever
afterwards. If this great Teacher of theirs could have seen Himself
after the Crucifixion, how could He have consented to mount the Cross
and to die as He did? This thought also comes into the mind of the man
who gazes at this picture. I thought of all this by snatches probably
between my attacks of delirium--for an hour and a half or so before
Colia's departure.

"Can there be an appearance of that which has no form? And yet it seemed
to me, at certain moments, that I beheld in some strange and impossible
form, that dark, dumb, irresistibly powerful, eternal force.

"I thought someone led me by the hand and showed me, by the light of
a candle, a huge, loathsome insect, which he assured me was that very
force, that very almighty, dumb, irresistible Power, and laughed at
the indignation with which I received this information. In my room they
always light the little lamp before my icon for the night; it gives a
feeble flicker of light, but it is strong enough to see by dimly, and
if you sit just under it you can even read by it. I think it was about
twelve or a little past that night. I had not slept a wink, and was
lying with my eyes wide open, when suddenly the door opened, and in came
Rogojin.

"He entered, and shut the door behind him. Then he silently gazed at me
and went quickly to the corner of the room where the lamp was burning
and sat down underneath it.

"I was much surprised, and looked at him expectantly.

"Rogojin only leaned his elbow on the table and silently stared at me.
So passed two or three minutes, and I recollect that his silence hurt
and offended me very much. Why did he not speak?

"That his arrival at this time of night struck me as more or less
strange may possibly be the case; but I remember I was by no means
amazed at it. On the contrary, though I had not actually told him my
thought in the morning, yet I know he understood it; and this thought
was of such a character that it would not be anything very remarkable,
if one were to come for further talk about it at any hour of night,
however late.

"I thought he must have come for this purpose.

"In the morning we had parted not the best of friends; I remember he
looked at me with disagreeable sarcasm once or twice; and this same look
I observed in his eyes now--which was the cause of the annoyance I felt.

"I did not for a moment suspect that I was delirious and that this
Rogojin was but the result of fever and excitement. I had not the
slightest idea of such a theory at first.

"Meanwhile he continued to sit and stare jeeringly at me.

"I angrily turned round in bed and made up my mind that I would not say
a word unless he did; so I rested silently on my pillow determined to
remain dumb, if it were to last till morning. I felt resolved that he
should speak first. Probably twenty minutes or so passed in this way.
Suddenly the idea struck me--what if this is an apparition and not
Rogojin himself?

"Neither during my illness nor at any previous time had I ever seen an
apparition;--but I had always thought, both when I was a little boy, and
even now, that if I were to see one I should die on the spot--though I
don't believe in ghosts. And yet NOW, when the idea struck me that this
was a ghost and not Rogojin at all, I was not in the least alarmed.
Nay--the thought actually irritated me. Strangely enough, the decision
of the question as to whether this were a ghost or Rogojin did not, for
some reason or other, interest me nearly so much as it ought to have
done;--I think I began to muse about something altogether different. For
instance, I began to wonder why Rogojin, who had been in dressing--gown
and slippers when I saw him at home, had now put on a dress-coat and
white waistcoat and tie? I also thought to myself, I remember--'if
this is a ghost, and I am not afraid of it, why don't I approach it and
verify my suspicions? Perhaps I am afraid--' And no sooner did this last
idea enter my head than an icy blast blew over me; I felt a chill down
my backbone and my knees shook.

"At this very moment, as though divining my thoughts, Rogojin raised his
head from his arm and began to part his lips as though he were going to
laugh--but he continued to stare at me as persistently as before.

"I felt so furious with him at this moment that I longed to rush at
him; but as I had sworn that he should speak first, I continued to lie
still--and the more willingly, as I was still by no means satisfied as
to whether it really was Rogojin or not.

"I cannot remember how long this lasted; I cannot recollect, either,
whether consciousness forsook me at intervals, or not. But at last
Rogojin rose, staring at me as intently as ever, but not smiling any
longer,--and walking very softly, almost on tip-toes, to the door, he
opened it, went out, and shut it behind him.

"I did not rise from my bed, and I don't know how long I lay with my
eyes open, thinking. I don't know what I thought about, nor how I fell
asleep or became insensible; but I awoke next morning after nine o'clock
when they knocked at my door. My general orders are that if I don't open
the door and call, by nine o'clock, Matreona is to come and bring my
tea. When I now opened the door to her, the thought suddenly struck
me--how could he have come in, since the door was locked? I made
inquiries and found that Rogojin himself could not possibly have come
in, because all our doors were locked for the night.

"Well, this strange circumstance--which I have described with so
much detail--was the ultimate cause which led me to taking my final
determination. So that no logic, or logical deductions, had anything to
do with my resolve;--it was simply a matter of disgust.

"It was impossible for me to go on living when life was full of such
detestable, strange, tormenting forms. This ghost had humiliated
me;--nor could I bear to be subordinate to that dark, horrible force
which was embodied in the form of the loathsome insect. It was only
towards evening, when I had quite made up my mind on this point, that I
began to feel easier."

VII.

"I HAD a small pocket pistol. I had procured it while still a boy, at
that droll age when the stories of duels and highwaymen begin to delight
one, and when one imagines oneself nobly standing fire at some future
day, in a duel.

"There were a couple of old bullets in the bag which contained the
pistol, and powder enough in an old flask for two or three charges.

"The pistol was a wretched thing, very crooked and wouldn't carry
farther than fifteen paces at the most. However, it would send your
skull flying well enough if you pressed the muzzle of it against your
temple.

"I determined to die at Pavlofsk at sunrise, in the park--so as to make
no commotion in the house.

"This 'explanation' will make the matter clear enough to the police.
Students of psychology, and anyone else who likes, may make what they
please of it. I should not like this paper, however, to be made public.
I request the prince to keep a copy himself, and to give a copy to
Aglaya Ivanovna Epanchin. This is my last will and testament. As for
my skeleton, I bequeath it to the Medical Academy for the benefit of
science.

"I recognize no jurisdiction over myself, and I know that I am now
beyond the power of laws and judges.

"A little while ago a very amusing idea struck me. What if I were now to
commit some terrible crime--murder ten fellow-creatures, for instance,
or anything else that is thought most shocking and dreadful in this
world--what a dilemma my judges would be in, with a criminal who only
has a fortnight to live in any case, now that the rack and other forms
of torture are abolished! Why, I should die comfortably in their own
hospital--in a warm, clean room, with an attentive doctor--probably much
more comfortably than I should at home.

"I don't understand why people in my position do not oftener indulge in
such ideas--if only for a joke! Perhaps they do! Who knows! There are
plenty of merry souls among us!

"But though I do not recognize any jurisdiction over myself, still I
know that I shall be judged, when I am nothing but a voiceless lump
of clay; therefore I do not wish to go before I have left a word of
reply--the reply of a free man--not one forced to justify himself--oh
no! I have no need to ask forgiveness of anyone. I wish to say a word
merely because I happen to desire it of my own free will.

"Here, in the first place, comes a strange thought!

"Who, in the name of what Law, would think of disputing my full personal
right over the fortnight of life left to me? What jurisdiction can
be brought to bear upon the case? Who would wish me, not only to be
sentenced, but to endure the sentence to the end? Surely there exists
no man who would wish such a thing--why should anyone desire it? For
the sake of morality? Well, I can understand that if I were to make
an attempt upon my own life while in the enjoyment of full health and
vigour--my life which might have been 'useful,' etc., etc.--morality
might reproach me, according to the old routine, for disposing of my
life without permission--or whatever its tenet may be. But now, NOW,
when my sentence is out and my days numbered! How can morality have need
of my last breaths, and why should I die listening to the consolations
offered by the prince, who, without doubt, would not omit to demonstrate
that death is actually a benefactor to me? (Christians like him always
end up with that--it is their pet theory.) And what do they want with
their ridiculous 'Pavlofsk trees'? To sweeten my last hours? Cannot they
understand that the more I forget myself, the more I let myself become
attached to these last illusions of life and love, by means of which
they try to hide from me Meyer's wall, and all that is so plainly
written on it--the more unhappy they make me? What is the use of all
your nature to me--all your parks and trees, your sunsets and sunrises,
your blue skies and your self-satisfied faces--when all this wealth
of beauty and happiness begins with the fact that it accounts me--only
me--one too many! What is the good of all this beauty and glory to me,
when every second, every moment, I cannot but be aware that this little
fly which buzzes around my head in the sun's rays--even this little fly
is a sharer and participator in all the glory of the universe, and knows
its place and is happy in it;--while I--only I, am an outcast, and have
been blind to the fact hitherto, thanks to my simplicity! Oh! I know
well how the prince and others would like me, instead of indulging in
all these wicked words of my own, to sing, to the glory and triumph of
morality, that well-known verse of Gilbert's:

"'O, puissent voir longtemps votre beaute sacree Tant d'amis, sourds a
mes adieux! Qu'ils meurent pleins de jours, que leur mort soit pleuree,
Qu'un ami leur ferme les yeux!'

"But believe me, believe me, my simple-hearted friends, that in this
highly moral verse, in this academical blessing to the world in general
in the French language, is hidden the intensest gall and bitterness;
but so well concealed is the venom, that I dare say the poet actually
persuaded himself that his words were full of the tears of pardon and
peace, instead of the bitterness of disappointment and malice, and so
died in the delusion.

"Do you know there is a limit of ignominy, beyond which man's
consciousness of shame cannot go, and after which begins satisfaction in
shame? Well, of course humility is a great force in that sense, I admit
that--though not in the sense in which religion accounts humility to be
strength!

"Religion!--I admit eternal life--and perhaps I always did admit it.

"Admitted that consciousness is called into existence by the will of a
Higher Power; admitted that this consciousness looks out upon the world
and says 'I am;' and admitted that the Higher Power wills that the
consciousness so called into existence, be suddenly extinguished (for
so--for some unexplained reason--it is and must be)--still there comes
the eternal question--why must I be humble through all this? Is it not
enough that I am devoured, without my being expected to bless the
power that devours me? Surely--surely I need not suppose that
Somebody--there--will be offended because I do not wish to live out the
fortnight allowed me? I don't believe it.

"It is much simpler, and far more likely, to believe that my death
is needed--the death of an insignificant atom--in order to fulfil the
general harmony of the universe--in order to make even some plus or
minus in the sum of existence. Just as every day the death of numbers of
beings is necessary because without their annihilation the rest cannot
live on--(although we must admit that the idea is not a particularly
grand one in itself!)

"However--admit the fact! Admit that without such perpetual devouring of
one another the world cannot continue to exist, or could never have been
organized--I am ever ready to confess that I cannot understand why this
is so--but I'll tell you what I DO know, for certain. If I have once
been given to understand and realize that I AM--what does it matter
to me that the world is organized on a system full of errors and that
otherwise it cannot be organized at all? Who will or can judge me after
this? Say what you like--the thing is impossible and unjust!

"And meanwhile I have never been able, in spite of my great desire to
do so, to persuade myself that there is no future existence, and no
Providence.

"The fact of the matter is that all this DOES exist, but that we know
absolutely nothing about the future life and its laws!

"But it is so difficult, and even impossible to understand, that surely
I am not to be blamed because I could not fathom the incomprehensible?

"Of course I know they say that one must be obedient, and of course,
too, the prince is one of those who say so: that one must be obedient
without questions, out of pure goodness of heart, and that for my worthy
conduct in this matter I shall meet with reward in another world. We
degrade God when we attribute our own ideas to Him, out of annoyance
that we cannot fathom His ways.

"Again, I repeat, I cannot be blamed because I am unable to understand
that which it is not given to mankind to fathom. Why am I to be judged
because I could not comprehend the Will and Laws of Providence? No, we
had better drop religion.

"And enough of this. By the time I have got so far in the reading of
my document the sun will be up and the huge force of his rays will be
acting upon the living world. So be it. I shall die gazing straight at
the great Fountain of life and power; I do not want this life!

"If I had had the power to prevent my own birth I should certainly never
have consented to accept existence under such ridiculous conditions.
However, I have the power to end my existence, although I do but give
back days that are already numbered. It is an insignificant gift, and my
revolt is equally insignificant.

"Final explanation: I die, not in the least because I am unable to
support these next three weeks. Oh no, I should find strength enough,
and if I wished it I could obtain consolation from the thought of the
injury that is done me. But I am not a French poet, and I do not desire
such consolation. And finally, nature has so limited my capacity for
work or activity of any kind, in allotting me but three weeks of time,
that suicide is about the only thing left that I can begin and end in
the time of my own free will.

"Perhaps then I am anxious to take advantage of my last chance of doing
something for myself. A protest is sometimes no small thing."

The explanation was finished; Hippolyte paused at last.

There is, in extreme cases, a final stage of cynical candour when a
nervous man, excited, and beside himself with emotion, will be afraid
of nothing and ready for any sort of scandal, nay, glad of it. The
extraordinary, almost unnatural, tension of the nerves which upheld
Hippolyte up to this point, had now arrived at this final stage. This
poor feeble boy of eighteen--exhausted by disease--looked for all the
world as weak and frail as a leaflet torn from its parent tree and
trembling in the breeze; but no sooner had his eye swept over his
audience, for the first time during the whole of the last hour, than the
most contemptuous, the most haughty expression of repugnance lighted
up his face. He defied them all, as it were. But his hearers were
indignant, too; they rose to their feet with annoyance. Fatigue,
the wine consumed, the strain of listening so long, all added to the
disagreeable impression which the reading had made upon them.

Suddenly Hippolyte jumped up as though he had been shot.

"The sun is rising," he cried, seeing the gilded tops of the trees, and
pointing to them as to a miracle. "See, it is rising now!"

"Well, what then? Did you suppose it wasn't going to rise?" asked
Ferdishenko.

"It's going to be atrociously hot again all day," said Gania, with an
air of annoyance, taking his hat. "A month of this... Are you coming
home, Ptitsin?" Hippolyte listened to this in amazement, almost
amounting to stupefaction. Suddenly he became deadly pale and shuddered.

"You manage your composure too awkwardly. I see you wish to insult me,"
he cried to Gania. "You--you are a cur!" He looked at Gania with an
expression of malice.

"What on earth is the matter with the boy? What phenomenal
feeble-mindedness!" exclaimed Ferdishenko.

"Oh, he's simply a fool," said Gania.

Hippolyte braced himself up a little.

"I understand, gentlemen," he began, trembling as before, and stumbling
over every word, "that I have deserved your resentment, and--and
am sorry that I should have troubled you with this raving nonsense"
(pointing to his article), "or rather, I am sorry that I have not
troubled you enough." He smiled feebly. "Have I troubled you, Evgenie
Pavlovitch?" He suddenly turned on Evgenie with this question. "Tell me
now, have I troubled you or not?"

"Well, it was a little drawn out, perhaps; but--"

"Come, speak out! Don't lie, for once in your life--speak out!"
continued Hippolyte, quivering with agitation.

"Oh, my good sir, I assure you it's entirely the same to me. Please
leave me in peace," said Evgenie, angrily, turning his back on him.

"Good-night, prince," said Ptitsin, approaching his host.

"What are you thinking of? Don't go, he'll blow his brains out in a
minute!" cried Vera Lebedeff, rushing up to Hippolyte and catching hold
of his hands in a torment of alarm. "What are you thinking of? He said
he would blow his brains out at sunrise."

"Oh, he won't shoot himself!" cried several voices, sarcastically.

"Gentlemen, you'd better look out," cried Colia, also seizing Hippolyte
by the hand. "Just look at him! Prince, what are you thinking of?" Vera
and Colia, and Keller, and Burdovsky were all crowding round Hippolyte
now and holding him down.

"He has the right--the right--"-murmured Burdovsky. "Excuse me, prince,
but what are your arrangements?" asked Lebedeff, tipsy and exasperated,
going up to Muishkin.

"What do you mean by 'arrangements'?"

"No, no, excuse me! I'm master of this house, though I do not wish to
lack respect towards you. You are master of the house too, in a way; but
I can't allow this sort of thing--"

"He won't shoot himself; the boy is only playing the fool," said General
Ivolgin, suddenly and unexpectedly, with indignation.

"I know he won't, I know he won't, general; but I--I'm master here!"

"Listen, Mr. Terentieff," said Ptitsin, who had bidden the prince
good-night, and was now holding out his hand to Hippolyte; "I think you
remark in that manuscript of yours, that you bequeath your skeleton to
the Academy. Are you referring to your own skeleton--I mean, your very
bones?"

"Yes, my bones, I--"

"Quite so, I see; because, you know, little mistakes have occurred now
and then. There was a case--"

"Why do you tease him?" cried the prince, suddenly.

"You've moved him to tears," added Ferdishenko. But Hippolyte was by no
means weeping. He was about to move from his place, when his four guards
rushed at him and seized him once more. There was a laugh at this.

"He led up to this on purpose. He took the trouble of writing all that
so that people should come and grab him by the arm," observed Rogojin.
"Good-night, prince. What a time we've sat here, my very bones ache!"

"If you really intended to shoot yourself, Terentieff," said Evgenie
Pavlovitch, laughing, "if I were you, after all these compliments, I
should just not shoot myself in order to vex them all."

"They are very anxious to see me blow my brains out," said Hippolyte,
bitterly.

"Yes, they'll be awfully annoyed if they don't see it."

"Then you think they won't see it?"

"I am not trying to egg you on. On the contrary, I think it very likely
that you may shoot yourself; but the principal thing is to keep cool,"
said Evgenie with a drawl, and with great condescension.

"I only now perceive what a terrible mistake I made in reading this
article to them," said Hippolyte, suddenly, addressing Evgenie, and
looking at him with an expression of trust and confidence, as though he
were applying to a friend for counsel.

"Yes, it's a droll situation; I really don't know what advice to give
you," replied Evgenie, laughing. Hippolyte gazed steadfastly at him,
but said nothing. To look at him one might have supposed that he was
unconscious at intervals.

"Excuse me," said Lebedeff, "but did you observe the young gentleman's
style? 'I'll go and blow my brains out in the park,' says he,' so as not
to disturb anyone.' He thinks he won't disturb anybody if he goes three
yards away, into the park, and blows his brains out there."

"Gentlemen--" began the prince.

"No, no, excuse me, most revered prince," Lebedeff interrupted,
excitedly. "Since you must have observed yourself that this is no joke,
and since at least half your guests must also have concluded that after
all that has been said this youth MUST blow his brains out for honour's
sake--I--as master of this house, and before these witnesses, now call
upon you to take steps."

"Yes, but what am I to do, Lebedeff? What steps am I to take? I am
ready."

"I'll tell you. In the first place he must immediately deliver up the
pistol which he boasted of, with all its appurtenances. If he does
this I shall consent to his being allowed to spend the night in
this house--considering his feeble state of health, and of course
conditionally upon his being under proper supervision. But tomorrow he
must go elsewhere. Excuse me, prince! Should he refuse to deliver up his
weapon, then I shall instantly seize one of his arms and General Ivolgin
the other, and we shall hold him until the police arrive and take the
matter into their own hands. Mr. Ferdishenko will kindly fetch them."

At this there was a dreadful noise; Lebedeff danced about in his
excitement; Ferdishenko prepared to go for the police; Gania frantically
insisted that it was all nonsense, "for nobody was going to shoot
themselves." Evgenie Pavlovitch said nothing.

"Prince," whispered Hippolyte, suddenly, his eyes all ablaze, "you don't
suppose that I did not foresee all this hatred?" He looked at the prince
as though he expected him to reply, for a moment. "Enough!" he added at
length, and addressing the whole company, he cried: "It's all my fault,
gentlemen! Lebedeff, here's the key," (he took out a small bunch of
keys); "this one, the last but one--Colia will show you--Colia, where's
Colia?" he cried, looking straight at Colia and not seeing him. "Yes,
he'll show you; he packed the bag with me this morning. Take him up,
Colia; my bag is upstairs in the prince's study, under the table. Here's
the key, and in the little case you'll find my pistol and the powder,
and all. Colia packed it himself, Mr. Lebedeff; he'll show you; but it's
on condition that tomorrow morning, when I leave for Petersburg, you
will give me back my pistol, do you hear? I do this for the prince's
sake, not yours."

"Capital, that's much better!" cried Lebedeff, and seizing the key he
made off in haste.

Colia stopped a moment as though he wished to say something; but
Lebedeff dragged him away.

Hippolyte looked around at the laughing guests. The prince observed that
his teeth were chattering as though in a violent attack of ague.

"What brutes they all are!" he whispered to the prince. Whenever he
addressed him he lowered his voice.

"Let them alone, you're too weak now--"

"Yes, directly; I'll go away directly. I'll--"

Suddenly he embraced Muishkin.

"Perhaps you think I am mad, eh?" he asked him, laughing very strangely.

"No, but you--"

"Directly, directly! Stand still a moment, I wish to look in your eyes;
don't speak--stand so--let me look at you! I am bidding farewell to
mankind."

He stood so for ten seconds, gazing at the prince, motionless, deadly
pale, his temples wet with perspiration; he held the prince's hand in a
strange grip, as though afraid to let him go.

"Hippolyte, Hippolyte, what is the matter with you?" cried Muishkin.

"Directly! There, that's enough. I'll lie down directly. I must drink to
the sun's health. I wish to--I insist upon it! Let go!"

He seized a glass from the table, broke away from the prince, and in a
moment had reached the terrace steps.

The prince made after him, but it so happened that at this moment
Evgenie Pavlovitch stretched out his hand to say good-night. The next
instant there was a general outcry, and then followed a few moments of
indescribable excitement.

Reaching the steps, Hippolyte had paused, holding the glass in his left
hand while he put his right hand into his coat pocket.

Keller insisted afterwards that he had held his right hand in his pocket
all the while, when he was speaking to the prince, and that he had held
the latter's shoulder with his left hand only. This circumstance, Keller
affirmed, had led him to feel some suspicion from the first. However
this may be, Keller ran after Hippolyte, but he was too late.

He caught sight of something flashing in Hippolyte's right hand, and
saw that it was a pistol. He rushed at him, but at that very instant
Hippolyte raised the pistol to his temple and pulled the trigger. There
followed a sharp metallic click, but no report.

When Keller seized the would-be suicide, the latter fell forward into
his arms, probably actually believing that he was shot. Keller had hold
of the pistol now. Hippolyte was immediately placed in a chair, while
the whole company thronged around excitedly, talking and asking each
other questions. Every one of them had heard the snap of the trigger,
and yet they saw a live and apparently unharmed man before them.

Hippolyte himself sat quite unconscious of what was going on, and gazed
around with a senseless expression.

Lebedeff and Colia came rushing up at this moment.

"What is it?" someone asked, breathlessly--"A misfire?"

"Perhaps it wasn't loaded," said several voices.

"It's loaded all right," said Keller, examining the pistol, "but--"

"What! did it miss fire?"

"There was no cap in it," Keller announced.

It would be difficult to describe the pitiable scene that now followed.
The first sensation of alarm soon gave place to amusement; some
burst out laughing loud and heartily, and seemed to find a malicious
satisfaction in the joke. Poor Hippolyte sobbed hysterically; he wrung
his hands; he approached everyone in turn--even Ferdishenko--and took
them by both hands, and swore solemnly that he had forgotten--absolutely
forgotten--"accidentally, and not on purpose,"--to put a cap in--that
he "had ten of them, at least, in his pocket." He pulled them out and
showed them to everyone; he protested that he had not liked to put one
in beforehand for fear of an accidental explosion in his pocket. That
he had thought he would have lots of time to put it in afterwards--when
required--and, that, in the heat of the moment, he had forgotten all
about it. He threw himself upon the prince, then on Evgenie Pavlovitch.
He entreated Keller to give him back the pistol, and he'd soon show them
all that "his honour--his honour,"--but he was "dishonoured, now, for
ever!"

He fell senseless at last--and was carried into the prince's study.

Lebedeff, now quite sobered down, sent for a doctor; and he and his
daughter, with Burdovsky and General Ivolgin, remained by the sick man's
couch.

When he was carried away unconscious, Keller stood in the middle of the
room, and made the following declaration to the company in general, in a
loud tone of voice, with emphasis upon each word.

"Gentlemen, if any one of you casts any doubt again, before me,
upon Hippolyte's good faith, or hints that the cap was forgotten
intentionally, or suggests that this unhappy boy was acting a part
before us, I beg to announce that the person so speaking shall account
to me for his words."

No one replied.

The company departed very quickly, in a mass. Ptitsin, Gania, and
Rogojin went away together.

The prince was much astonished that Evgenie Pavlovitch changed his mind,
and took his departure without the conversation he had requested.

"Why, you wished to have a talk with me when the others left?" he said.

"Quite so," said Evgenie, sitting down suddenly beside him, "but I have
changed my mind for the time being. I confess, I am too disturbed, and
so, I think, are you; and the matter as to which I wished to consult you
is too serious to tackle with one's mind even a little disturbed; too
serious both for myself and for you. You see, prince, for once in my
life I wish to perform an absolutely honest action, that is, an action
with no ulterior motive; and I think I am hardly in a condition to talk
of it just at this moment, and--and--well, we'll discuss it another
time. Perhaps the matter may gain in clearness if we wait for two
or three days--just the two or three days which I must spend in
Petersburg."

Here he rose again from his chair, so that it seemed strange that he
should have thought it worth while to sit down at all.

The prince thought, too, that he looked vexed and annoyed, and not
nearly so friendly towards himself as he had been earlier in the night.

"I suppose you will go to the sufferer's bedside now?" he added.

"Yes, I am afraid..." began the prince.

"Oh, you needn't fear! He'll live another six weeks all right. Very
likely he will recover altogether; but I strongly advise you to pack him
off tomorrow."

"I think I may have offended him by saying nothing just now. I am afraid
he may suspect that I doubted his good faith,--about shooting himself,
you know. What do you think, Evgenie Pavlovitch?"

"Not a bit of it! You are much too good to him; you shouldn't care a
hang about what he thinks. I have heard of such things before, but never
came across, till tonight, a man who would actually shoot himself in
order to gain a vulgar notoriety, or blow out his brains for spite,
if he finds that people don't care to pat him on the back for his
sanguinary intentions. But what astonishes me more than anything is
the fellow's candid confession of weakness. You'd better get rid of him
tomorrow, in any case.

"Do you think he will make another attempt?"

"Oh no, not he, not now! But you have to be very careful with this
sort of gentleman. Crime is too often the last resource of these petty
nonentities. This young fellow is quite capable of cutting the throats
of ten people, simply for a lark, as he told us in his 'explanation.' I
assure you those confounded words of his will not let me sleep."

"I think you disturb yourself too much."

"What an extraordinary person you are, prince! Do you mean to say that
you doubt the fact that he is capable of murdering ten men?"

"I daren't say, one way or the other; all this is very strange--but--"

"Well, as you like, just as you like," said Evgenie Pavlovitch,
irritably. "Only you are such a plucky fellow, take care you don't get
included among the ten victims!"

"Oh, he is much more likely not to kill anyone at all," said the prince,
gazing thoughtfully at Evgenie. The latter laughed disagreeably.

"Well, au revoir! Did you observe that he 'willed' a copy of his
confession to Aglaya Ivanovna?"

"Yes, I did; I am thinking of it."

"In connection with 'the ten,' eh?" laughed Evgenie, as he left the
room.

An hour later, towards four o'clock, the prince went into the park.
He had endeavoured to fall asleep, but could not, owing to the painful
beating of his heart.

He had left things quiet and peaceful; the invalid was fast asleep, and
the doctor, who had been called in, had stated that there was no special
danger. Lebedeff, Colia, and Burdovsky were lying down in the sick-room,
ready to take it in turns to watch. There was nothing to fear,
therefore, at home.

But the prince's mental perturbation increased every moment. He wandered
about the park, looking absently around him, and paused in astonishment
when he suddenly found himself in the empty space with the rows of
chairs round it, near the Vauxhall. The look of the place struck him
as dreadful now: so he turned round and went by the path which he had
followed with the Epanchins on the way to the band, until he reached the
green bench which Aglaya had pointed out for their rendezvous. He sat
down on it and suddenly burst into a loud fit of laughter, immediately
followed by a feeling of irritation. His disturbance of mind continued;
he felt that he must go away somewhere, anywhere.

Above his head some little bird sang out, of a sudden; he began to peer
about for it among the leaves. Suddenly the bird darted out of the tree
and away, and instantly he thought of the "fly buzzing about in the
sun's rays" that Hippolyte had talked of; how that it knew its place
and was a participator in the universal life, while he alone was an
"outcast." This picture had impressed him at the time, and he meditated
upon it now. An old, forgotten memory awoke in his brain, and suddenly
burst into clearness and light. It was a recollection of Switzerland,
during the first year of his cure, the very first months. At that time
he had been pretty nearly an idiot still; he could not speak properly,
and had difficulty in understanding when others spoke to him. He climbed
the mountain-side, one sunny morning, and wandered long and aimlessly
with a certain thought in his brain, which would not become clear. Above
him was the blazing sky, below, the lake; all around was the horizon,
clear and infinite. He looked out upon this, long and anxiously. He
remembered how he had stretched out his arms towards the beautiful,
boundless blue of the horizon, and wept, and wept. What had so tormented
him was the idea that he was a stranger to all this, that he was outside
this glorious festival.

What was this universe? What was this grand, eternal pageant to which
he had yearned from his childhood up, and in which he could never take
part? Every morning the same magnificent sun; every morning the
same rainbow in the waterfall; every evening the same glow on the
snow-mountains.

Every little fly that buzzed in the sun's rays was a singer in the
universal chorus, "knew its place, and was happy in it." Every blade of
grass grew and was happy. Everything knew its path and loved it, went
forth with a song and returned with a song; only he knew nothing,
understood nothing, neither men nor words, nor any of nature's voices;
he was a stranger and an outcast.

Oh, he could not then speak these words, or express all he felt! He had
been tormented dumbly; but now it appeared to him that he must have
said these very words--even then--and that Hippolyte must have taken his
picture of the little fly from his tears and words of that time.

He was sure of it, and his heart beat excitedly at the thought, he knew
not why.

He fell asleep on the bench; but his mental disquiet continued through
his slumbers.

Just before he dozed off, the idea of Hippolyte murdering ten men
flitted through his brain, and he smiled at the absurdity of such a
thought.

Around him all was quiet; only the flutter and whisper of the leaves
broke the silence, but broke it only to cause it to appear yet more deep
and still.

He dreamed many dreams as he sat there, and all were full of disquiet,
so that he shuddered every moment.

At length a woman seemed to approach him. He knew her, oh! he knew her
only too well. He could always name her and recognize her anywhere; but,
strange, she seemed to have quite a different face from hers, as he had
known it, and he felt a tormenting desire to be able to say she was not
the same woman. In the face before him there was such dreadful remorse
and horror that he thought she must be a criminal, that she must have
just committed some awful crime.

Tears were trembling on her white cheek. She beckoned him, but placed
her finger on her lip as though to warn him that he must follow her very
quietly. His heart froze within him. He wouldn't, he COULDN'T confess
her to be a criminal, and yet he felt that something dreadful would
happen the next moment, something which would blast his whole life.

She seemed to wish to show him something, not far off, in the park.

He rose from his seat in order to follow her, when a bright, clear peal
of laughter rang out by his side. He felt somebody's hand suddenly in
his own, seized it, pressed it hard, and awoke. Before him stood Aglaya,
laughing aloud.

VIII.

SHE laughed, but she was rather angry too.

"He's asleep! You were asleep," she said, with contemptuous surprise.

"Is it really you?" muttered the prince, not quite himself as yet,
and recognizing her with a start of amazement. "Oh yes, of course," he
added, "this is our rendezvous. I fell asleep here."

"So I saw."

"Did no one awake me besides yourself? Was there no one else here? I
thought there was another woman."

"There was another woman here?"

At last he was wide awake.

"It was a dream, of course," he said, musingly. "Strange that I should
have a dream like that at such a moment. Sit down--"

He took her hand and seated her on the bench; then sat down beside her
and reflected.

Aglaya did not begin the conversation, but contented herself with
watching her companion intently.

He looked back at her, but at times it was clear that he did not see her
and was not thinking of her.

Aglaya began to flush up.

"Oh yes!" cried the prince, starting. "Hippolyte's suicide--"

"What? At your house?" she asked, but without much surprise. "He was
